
PAGE 1:
‘An enthralling and intelligent 
thriller swirling with dark, 
beguiling shadows’ 
Joseph O’Connor, 
author of Star of the Sea 
tht 
semantics 
of murder 
Aifric Campbell 


PAGE 2:


PAGE 3:
Aifric Campbell was born in Ireland. As a convent schoolgirl 
in Dublin, her greyhound won the Irish Derby and a hymn she 
co-wrote won a national TV song contest. She moved to 
Sweden where she worked as an au pair, completed a 
Linguistics degree and lectured in semantics at the University 
of Goteborg. She spent thirteen years as an investment banker 
in the City of London before leaving to study psychotherapy 
and creative writing, most recently at the University of East 
Anglia. She now lives in Sussex with her husband and son. 
The Semantics of Murder is inspired by the life and work of 
Richard Montague, a brilliant and controversial professor of 
Philosophy at the University of California at Los Angeles who 
was murdered in 1971. The crime remains unsolved. 
The Semantics of Murder was shortlisted for the Glen Dimplex 
New Writers Award 2008. 
For more information on the book and the author, please 
visit www.thesemanticsofmurder.com 


PAGE 4:
Praise for The Semantics of Murder 
‘A profoundly original new writer. The Semantics of Murder leads 
us on a dark and thrilling quest through murderous spaces of 
the mind, in a prose of startling and inventive beauty’ 
Stevie Davies 
‘This gripping psychological drama hooks the reader into a 
compelling labyrinth of sibling rivalry and stealthy passion. 
It is an intellectual novel of ideas written with real verve 
and style’ Patricia Duncker 
‘An incredibly stimulating read’ Aesthetica 
‘Intriguing from the start’ Image 
‘[A] tense thriller’ Waterstone’s Books Quarterly 
‘An intellectual, complex psychological drama... This is an 
intriguing debut. I look forward to what’s next’ Irish World 


PAGE 5:
THE • SEMANTICS 
• OF •MURDER• 
Aifric Campbell 


PAGE 6:
A complete catalogue record for this book can 
be obtained from the British Library on request 
The right of Aifric Campbell to be identified as the author of this work 
has been asserted by her in accordance with the Copyright, Designs 
and Patents Act 1988 
Copyright © 2008 Aifric Campbell 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior 
permission of the publisher. 
First published in 2008 by Serpent’s Tail 
First published in this edition in 2009 by Serpent’s Tail, 
an imprint of Profile Books Ltd 
3A Exmouth House 
Pine Street 
Lodon EC1R 0JH 
website: www.serpentstail.com 
UK ISBN 978 1 84668 658 0 
US ISBN 978 1 84668 733 4 
Designed and typeset by Sue Lamble 
Printed and bound in Great Britain by 
CPI Bookmarque Ltd, Croydon, Surrey 
10 987654321 
© 
Product group from well-managed 
forests and other controlled sources 
Mixed Sources 
X'Qf-' www.fsc.org Cert no. TT-COC-002227 
-T Ov ©1996 Forest Stewardship Council 


PAGE 7:
To Mac 


PAGE 8:
I don’t claim that my novels are truth - I claim that they are 
fiction, out of which a kind of truth emerges. And I keep in my 
mind specifically that what I am writing is fiction because I am 
interested in truth - absolute truth - and I don’t pretend that 
what I’m writing is more than an imaginative extension of the 
truth - something inventive... But simply because one puts it 
out as a work of fiction then one is not a liar. I do think that this 
ought to be recognised by people. People get very annoyed if you 
say, look here, Goldilocks and the three bears is a pack of lies. 
Muriel Spark 


PAGE 9:
• PART ONE • 


PAGE 10:


PAGE 11:
• ONE • 
When Jay opened his front door, Cora slunk past him down the 
hallway like a sleepwalker groping through a familiar terrain. 
Rainwater dripped from her coat sleeves onto the wooden floor. 
She sank into the couch as if falling backwards from a great 
height, head bowed, chin almost touching her breastbone. Jay 
could smell her despair. 
A fierce hail rattled the windowpane. Cora tensed her 
shoulders, her coat fell open and he could see how rapidly she 
was losing weight, as if evaporating. He wondered if she had 
stopped eating entirely, if it was simply becoming too onerous a 
task. Just yesterday she’d confessed to a new-found fear of 
chewing, she was taking only soft liquid foods, the kind given 
to babies, feeding a growing suspicion about the dangers 
lurking in a piece of toast, a breast of chicken, terrified of the 
traps her body might spring. 
Jay crossed the room and took up his usual position in the 
brown leather Corbusier whose geometric frame seemed to 
hold out the promise of a structured aesthetic. Solutions. 
Orderliness. Clients - although he referred to them privately as 
patients - could choose between a matching armchair and the 
low-slung velvet couch where Cora now sat, arms splayed by 
her side. 
Tell me more about Christopher,’ he said. 
A muscle spasm nagged at her left eyelid, one of the new 
symptoms she had acquired since they first met, a steady 
3 


PAGE 12:
Aifric Campbell 
accumulation of stigmata that advertised her deteriorating 
condition. The tip of her tongue probed a cold sore. A crop of 
insistent pimples advanced along the underside of her chin. Her 
fingernails were uncomfortably short and there were livid 
streaks of pink rawness where she had stripped off the cuticles. 
Tell me about Christopher,’ he repeated. 
‘I can’t,’ she said and rammed a knuckle into her mouth, 
teeth sinking into the bone, leaving trace prints on the skin. 
Since the mention of her baby godson two weeks ago, Cora had 
been chronically tearful, nostrils flared red at the tips, crumpled 
tissues heaped on her lap. This is not me,’ she sobbed. ‘It’s like 
I’m leaking,’ and for a moment, Jay saw her slumped in a blue 
rowing boat, oarless and bobbing on the winter Serpentine. 
Tell me.’ 
‘I held him just after he was born,’ she whispered, her voice 
barely audible against the roar of the rain. ‘Christopher never 
cries when I hold him,' she sniffed and Jay heard a pink-lipped 
wail, saw a wrinkled newborn swaddled in blue flannel. ‘When 
he was five months old I was in the garden. Amy was upstairs 
and he was wriggling in my arms, pounding his little fists. At 
my breast. I felt like I could do it, you know. I felt like I could 
feed him... and I knew if something happened to Amy—’ 
‘What is it you think might happen to Amy?' 
Cora swallowed, her panicked eyes darted around the room. 
‘Nothing. Nothing. She’s my closest friend. We... we were 
always going to do everything together.’ 
The air was thick with frantic secrets. Closing his eyes, Jay 
caught a fleeting glimpse of a red silk scarf flapping through a 
car window, heard the sound of swift, light footsteps receding 
in the night - it was the hurried press of Cora’s story unfolding 
just out of earshot, but when he listened, it fell silent. For five 
weeks now he had watched her scuttle round the fringes of her 
past while he sat in the armchair, a textbook arrangement of 
4 


PAGE 13:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
attentiveness in the fifty-minute hour. His body language had 
been successfully deflated years ago, during long sessions in 
front of the full-length mirror in his studio room, head swivel¬ 
ling between an oblique view of the Bay - all he could afford of 
San Francisco in those early days - and a honey strip of 
afternoon light sliding across the back wall. He’d studied his 
reflection, monitoring the gradual erosion of his identity into a 
pared-down expression of alert neutrality that would reassure 
his clients that he could listen without judgement, without 
pity, shock or horror; that he could take the story of a life and 
help them to rewrite it, give it a sequence and consequence it 
didn’t have, make it a better story. 
Cora was a referral from Ralph Laekin, one of the first 
doctors that Jay met when he arrived in the UK twenty years 
ago. A GP who had fled the National Health Service and 
invested his wife's inheritance in a private surgery for the 
Kensington elite, Laekin's compassion for the mental health of 
the privileged led him to joke more than once that he should 
have gone into psychiatry. Jay had taken up Cora’s case with 
enthusiasm, believing that she would be perfect for his require¬ 
ments. Now he wondered if he might be losing his touch. 
Finding the right candidate was a delicate process but over 
the years he'd learnt that voice pattern was a reliable indicator. 
He needed to hear a prospective client speak, to know this was 
a frequency that engaged him. Cora’s recorded voice, during 
her 28-second phone message, had started out in the hesitant 
lower range of a youngish woman testing the first notes of an 
ascending arpeggio and eventually stumbling into the upper 
limit of her register, so that it was no longer music at all, but a 
brittle shard of neutered sound on the verge of extinction. 
‘Mr Hamil - ton,’ she had begun, with a curious emphasis on 
the last syllable of his name as if she was reading aloud from an 
unfamiliar text. Jay heard the muffled insistence of a car alarm 
5 


PAGE 14:
Aifric Campbell 
and he pictured a darkened room, imagined her face scanned by 
passing headlights through a window. There was a sudden gasp 
of air, like a child who had been holding its breath and then 
Cora gave her first name - slowly, as if it might be difficult to 
pronounce. ‘If I could see you,’ she muttered, or so he thought, 
for even after six replays Jay could still not be certain that his 
interpretation was correct. But he was convinced he’d found 
the right material, he had a nose for these things and chose not 
to waste time evaluating instincts that were useful, so he 
removed the tape, placed it in a envelope and stored it in a box 
file labelled ‘First Encounters’. 
Cora had been three minutes late for her first session on a 
windworn November afternoon. She’d hesitated in the open 
doorway, head half-turned away as if she might change her 
mind and flee. A straggle of blasted leaves whipped about her 
legs and she brushed past him, found her way unbidden to the 
safe space. Jay could already detect a drained resolve in the 
pinch of her lips, the sense of someone getting thinner and 
fainter, losing definition and slipping away out of reach. A 
woman in her late thirties, with a pale round face and small 
nocturnal eyes set wide beneath unplucked brows. Her hair was 
fading out of an experimental auburn into an undistinguished 
brown and lay lank and matt on her shoulders. There was a 
suggestion of disarray in the accumulated fluff around the 
lapels of her suit jacket, the missing cuff button on her left 
sleeve. A loose thread dangled from the hem of her skirt. She 
wore a silver chain with a tiny solitaire diamond around her 
neck that had since disappeared, as if she’d decided that 
adornment was no longer appropriate. 
On that first session, Cora sat propped like a marionette on 
the Corbusier, arms draped over the sides. Jay wondered if she 
6 


PAGE 15:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
would speak at all, if the effort of showing up for the appoint¬ 
ment had exhausted her resources. Although he had never 
forgotten his humiliation at the hands of Hal Metzling, chief 
analyst at the San Francisco School of Psychoanalysis, who once 
unleashed a vicious and public attack when Jay pierced a 
client’s stubborn silence, he had decided to resolve the profes¬ 
sional debate about therapeutic interventions by eliminating 
silence as an opening strategy. These days he preferred to speed 
up the process and so he always started by saying: ‘My name is 
Jay Hamilton. I am a psychoanalyst. Perhaps you could begin by 
telling me why you are here.’ 
Cora began predictably enough, as if she were in a doctor’s 
surgery, with an outline of physical symptoms that he 
suspected were somatically motivated. 
‘It feels like croup. Dr Laekin told me I was hyper¬ 
ventilating. He said to breathe into a paper bag, but the attacks 
are getting worse. Before it was always just at night but then it 
started happening at work.’ 
She had struggled to keep a low profile in the office, trying 
to excuse her increasingly sporadic appearances with a host of 
minor ailments. Then, some weeks ago, she startled the 
receptionists by bursting into tears, stood beached in the lobby 
unable to contain her distress. Cora was like a mid-air explosion 
scattering debris everywhere and she guessed that people were 
already talking, gossip gators snapping at her fleeing heels. At 
night she’d lie watching the green digits count out her insomnia 
until dawn sneaked around the edge of the window blind and 
the bedroom walls towered over her, threatening collapse. 
‘I used to always read in bed,’ she said. ‘Maybe I should start 
again tonight.’ 
‘Perhaps you are suggesting that you should read a book 
instead of coming here,’ said Jay. ‘Perhaps you think that some 
writer might help you become your own therapist?' 
7 


PAGE 16:
Aifric Campbell 
Winching both arms back into the chair, Cora had lapsed 
into a prolonged silence, suddenly broken by the announce¬ 
ment that she held an administrative position at one of the 
leading corporate law firms in London - a fact that she articu¬ 
lated with emphasis, as if by advertising the pedigree of her 
employer, they could both be reassured that whatever misfor¬ 
tune had brought her to Jay’s door, it would surely pass. And 
then she lifted her head and from the repeated insistence of her 
life’s completeness, her desperate assertion of sanity and self- 
possession, her fleeting mention of her five-year marriage to 
Larry, Jay understood that Cora would be talking about 
childlessness and that she was here to stay. 
Nine desultory sessions had since come and gone, but he had 
yet to break the code. Each time she left he lingered in the still 
room casting about for the plot and, although there were 
moments where he sensed its darkroom image slowly forming 
beneath the surface, when he turned his head it vanished 
without trace. Outside he could hear the distant rumble of the 
street cleaners’ cart and the slow wet hiss of passing tyres. Cora 
stirred on the couch, her hand moved upwards to brush a lock 
of hair from her cheek and Jay was struck by the exertion that 
this gesture seemed to require, as if the entire structure of her 
limbs was on the verge of collapse. 
‘I knew this was a bad idea,’ she whimpered. 
New clients, he reminded himself, think the big effort is to 
come here at all, not realising that the real challenge will be 
walking away. He had no time for those analysts who encour¬ 
aged clients to become their own religion; like Narcissus 
drooling in his lake, they were seduced by their own minutiae, 
the way they held a coffee cup, the feelings aroused by certain 
department stores. ‘You have to keep a sense of humour, 
8 


PAGE 17:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
otherwise you’d go mad,’ said a near-hysterical group therapist 
to him one night, her naked breasts pressed against his chest as 
she offered herself up for a post-coital kiss. But there were 
many professionals willing to endure monotony in return for a 
healthy fee. ‘I’m doing society a favour,’ a well-known London 
analyst once confided over dinner. ‘Do you know how many 
husbands pay me to see their wives just so they don’t have to 
listen?’ 
Cora lifted her head. 
‘You never ask about my dreams,’ she said. 
‘Are you saying you have a dream you want to talk about?’ 
‘Isn’t that what you are supposed to do?’ 
Jay smiled over steepled fingers. ‘Perhaps you’re suggesting 
that we are not discussing the important things? That you feel 
the core issues are not emerging in this space. Maybe you want 
to say you are disappointed in me?’ 
‘Three times now and it’s always the same dream,’ she said. 
‘I’m in an underground car park with Amy. She’s loading 
shopping into the boot of her car and I’m holding her handbag, 
when this guy appears out of nowhere and snatches it right out 
of my hands. Amy screams. She’s always said that she carries 
her whole life around in her bag, so I run after him down the 
ramp into the darkness. I know it’s a waste of time, I can’t even 
see him anymore. Behind me I can hear her wailing, it’s a 
horrible screeching sound, but I can’t go back, I just keep on 
running.’ Cora stared down at her clenched fist. ‘I never stop.’ 
‘So you want me to tell you what the dream means?' Jay asked. 
‘Yes.’ 
‘What do you think it means?’ 
‘Why do you always answer a question with another 
question?’ 
9 


PAGE 18:
Aifric Campbell 
‘Perhaps you think it’s unfair that you should have to try 
and help yourself, Cora. Perhaps you are angry with me for not 
making your pain disappear.’ 
He let the silence settle, expecting that she would not speak 
again but she leaned forward and opened her palm to reveal a 
small blue birthday candle with a blackened wick. ‘Fourteen 
years ago today, I had an abortion.’ She held her breath to 
punctuate the aftershock of her words. ‘It was way before Larry, 
he doesn’t know. Amy came with me. She was the only one 
who knew.’ 
Cora burrowed down in her coat and a faint stench of wet wool 
filled the room. Jay curled his hand over the arm of his chair 
and stroked the soft leather. Timing therapeutic interventions 
was a tricky business and it was often a difficult judgement call, 
he reflected, when to speak, when to remain silent. Clients 
clamour for dream interpretation, only to recoil in horror from 
the hidden truths that burst forwards to greet them like some 
slathering primitive. 
‘Fourteen years ago you aborted your baby,’ he began, 
squeezing the warm leather. ‘You believe Amy gave you her 
blessing. You suspect that she may even have encouraged you. 
You say that both of you were supposed to do everything 
together, but Amy went on to have a baby when you could not.’ 
Cora pawed at the cushion, she was breathing only in instal¬ 
ments as if rationing the air. ‘You believe that your infertility is 
a punishment for your abortion,’ he continued. ‘Your hands feel 
numb and useless because they are not nursing a baby. You 
imagine that Christopher is yours. Sometimes you even believe 
he needs you more than his mother.’ 
‘Noooooo,’ she moaned and flung herself forwards, jack¬ 
knifed on the couch. Jay nodded, releasing his grip. 


PAGE 19:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
‘This is what you are dreaming about, Cora. This is what 
you wish for: that Amy will disappear and her baby will become 
yours.’ 
She howled, a long thin desolate wail and staggered to her 
feet, fingers clutching at her stomach as if she might be sick. Jay 
followed her into the hall, watched her scrabble at the latch and 
bolt across the street where she stumbled on the kerb and fell 
to her knees, spilling the contents of her handbag on the 
pavement. He thought she might sink prostrate into the wet 
stone, but she clawed her belongings back into the bag and 
hauled herself upright, foot plunging into a puddle of slick 
black water as she rounded the corner and disappeared. Jay 
bent down to retrieve a sodden leaf from the matwell and 
closed his front door, retreating down the hall to the space that 
Cora had just fled. 
\ 
11 


PAGE 20:
# TWO • 
\ 
Eighteen years ago, on his first viewing of number 19 Edwardes 
Square, Jay had known immediately that the ground floor 
double-depth living space would be perfect for his needs: north 
facing, with no distracting views, its 13-foot ceiling managed to 
create the illusion of airiness in the tall narrow house. He had 
paid careful attention to the interior design and a deliberate 
absence of personality filled the room. Sailcloth curtains skirted 
the sides of sash windows whose lower halves provided a 
shuttered privacy from the street. The plaster half-breasts of six 
uplighters receded into the white walls, illuminating each 
corner in a soft overhead glow. Floor to ceiling shelves flanked a 
lustreless marble fireplace with a display of professional books. 
Alphabetically ordered, regularly dusted. The more startling 
titles were kept in his first-floor study: Sexual Orientation in Self- 
Mutilating Adolescents; Choice Behaviour in Rhesus Monkeys: Cocaine 
Versus Food; Hungry for Love: Mothers Who Starve Their Children. 
Jay had considered the appeal of a blank interior, for art 
would always be a gamble, but he eventually decided on three 
pictures. On the wall by the door and in the peripheral vision of 
seated clients hung a generic Picasso print - a disembodied fish 
head with its triangular suggestion of female. Above the couch 
was an unsigned water-coloured horizon he’d bought in Santa 
Monica from a dark-haired salesgirl who stifled a yawn while 
murmuring tourists shuffled their summer feet across the 
gallery floor. The third picture, suspended directly over the 
12 


PAGE 21:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
mantelpiece, was a muted print of the Natural History Museum 
-Jay’s favourite London facade - a delicate blend of sandstone 
and blue that had inspired Cora’s only question during her first 
session. 
‘Do you like stuffed animals?’ she’d said, staring up at the 
frame. 
‘Why do you ask?' 
‘All those animals in the museum gathering dust.’ 
‘Is that how you see yourself?’ 
‘It’s just the picture,’ she murmured and Jay opened her 
casebook and wrote: 
TajoCdervny. 
It was rare for his clients to comment on the artwork, in fact 
most of them seemed oblivious to the detail of their surround¬ 
ings, an observation that was supported by a recent study in The 
Journal of Psychoanalytic Practice, which revealed that eighteen 
out of twenty clients who had attended the same analyst for 
more than fifteen months failed to notice when a coffee table 
was removed from the room. But the Picasso had fulfilled its 
purpose within the first year. Jay had been just seven months 
into his Kensington practice and already aware of a shift in his 
accent, a slight flattening of the vowels, when a trust fund 
academic with a contemptuous quiff arrived ten minutes late 
for his first session and lounged restlessly on the couch before 
announcing that he was in the early stages of recovery from a 
deep depression. Turning his head towards the door, he 
scowled at the Picasso and mumbled, ‘So utterly predictable.’ 
He slipped a furtive hand into his pocket and, with sly pleasure, 
began unwrapping a Tesco’s bag. A light spray of sweat crept 
across his brow as he tilted the peeping glint of a blade. 
‘They use this for disembowelling. Fish or something,’ he 
said, lips curled in awed disgust. 
13 


PAGE 22:
Aifric Campbell 
‘Perhaps you feel the need to demonstrate that you can 
defend yourself against me?’ said Jay. 
‘Aren’t you afraid that I’ll go mad and start slashing you?’ 
said the quiff with a desperate giggle. 
‘Do you want to hurt me or hurt yourself?’ said Jay, looking 
away in a calculated gesture of unambiguous boredom, so that 
the quiff sprang out of the couch, holding the knife in an 
awkward grasp in front of his stomach. ‘Are you going to just sit 
there?’ he screamed, but Jay didn’t reply, did not even move 
until the quiff lunged and Jay leapt to his feet, disarming his 
client with a hand chop. 
‘Why’d he do it?’ asked the arresting officer after he 
escorted the sobbing client to the waiting vehicle. 
All anger is ultimately self-directed.’ 
‘I never knew therapy could be a dangerous line of work,' 
joked the constable. 
‘Keeping the peace, just like you.’ 
Jay reached down for the casebook that lay on the floor by his 
feet: tan softback, American quarto, only available from a legal 
supplier on Chancery Lane. At fifty-one, he understood how 
easily whimsical preference could blossom into a rigid 
eccentricity, but he had never acclimatised to the metric 
dimensions of A4, the oversized rectangle always seemed to 
exaggerate the blank slate of a beginning. He turned the cover 
to the first page where his client’s name was inscribed in large 
and hopeful letters. 
Cora/ M tiler 
Jay shook his head, sighed. It was infuriating to have made 
such a poor selection, particularly when she’d been hand¬ 
picked from the long list of potential candidates that clogged 


PAGE 23:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
his ansaphone with tentative introductions from doctors who 
knew the demands on his time and reputation. The luxury of 
choice was one he exercised to the full, for when he’d started 
out in San Francisco back in the 1970s, he had to take what he 
could get, had to scrabble for referrals, all those hours 
wandering down the blind alleys of other people’s lives, all 
those tears, rages, confessions, threats, promises; clients using 
him as a medium to communicate with the living and the dead, 
mothers and fathers and siblings and lovers and bosses and 
children and neighbours and friends. But the phenomenal 
success of his first book had changed everything. Psychoanalysis: 
Science or Art?, first published in 1978 (now into its seventh 
printing) and still a core text on the syllabus of most teaching 
colleges, was described by an eminent Maudsley psychiatrist as 
‘an engaging, fascinating and witty account of the tensions 
between psychoanalysis and medicine’. The book had strategi¬ 
cally positioned Jay in neutral territory, that no-man’s-land 
between psychiatry and psychotherapy and was surprisingly 
well-received in the UK. It was this unexpected response, 
followed by an invigorating lecture tour, that had first 
prompted Jay to consider emigration. 
The fact was, by 1981 he’d had it with barking seals and 
cable cars and was ready to close the door on his West Coast 
chapter and the first thirty-three years of his life, so he packed 
up and took a plane to London where the flatness and rigorous 
respect for personal space had a definite appeal. His timing 
could not have been better. In those days it was virgin territory, 
professionally speaking, just before the British public discov¬ 
ered their urgent need for therapeutic life-support. All through 
the late seventies, a torturous battle had raged between 
competing fiefdoms of therapists and medics. The British 
Psychoanalytic Society lobbied for the regulation of the 
disordered tribes of psychotherapists who, when they weren’t 
1 5 


PAGE 24:
Aifric Campbell 
squabbling with each other over tiresome theoretical differ¬ 
ences, were fending off the psychiatrists who trumpeted the 
results of their definitive studies on the effects of medication. 
These turf wars and shrill dissent meant that the Secretary of 
State for Health could comfortably ignore the lot of them and 
refuse to allow the issue of regulation to be brought before 
parliament. Despite his book, Jay remained consistently apolit¬ 
ical on its core issue, a position that endeared him to the 
psychiatrists but antagonised some analysts, who accused him 
of breaking ranks like some unruly cleric. Privately he believed 
that the argument about art versus science was a red herring, a 
legacy of Freud’s obsession with proving the scientific status of 
psychoanalysis, which Jay believed to be far more revealing 
about the great man’s insecurities than anything else. 
Two decades on, the mutual antipathy still festered in the 
great Drugs versus Therapy debate. Last year at a launch party 
he attended for the publication of an anthology of contempo¬ 
rary psychoanalytic essays, a psychiatrist with a bearded sneer 
raised his glass to the table and bellowed: ‘Where does the 
therapist go to unwind after a hard day’s work? Why, to 
another therapist of course.’ 
As a rule. Jay preferred to maintain a polite distance from 
his peers. His first few months in London - his silent tussle 
with the clinging tentacles of the BPS whose members were 
distrustful of his growing celebrity, his youthful American 
otherness - persuaded him to avoid the psychoghetto of 
Hampstead where analysts jostled for space with writers. 
Expanding his search southwards he found himself standing 
one morning in front of the black railings that marked the 
perimeter of the communal gardens on Edwardes Square while 
the estate agent struggled with the front door of number 19, 
chattering through the property’s advantages that Jay had 
already identified: 1389 square feet of Kensington backwater 


PAGE 25:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
evenly distributed over three levels and a first- and second-floor 
view of the gardens. The house was on the southern side of the 
square, a narrow street flanked at either end by pre-war 
mansion blocks. A flat-fronted late Victorian in a terraced row 
of six, it was squashed between a whitewashed mews and a 
small converted warehouse where the corners of large canvases 
were visible though high crescent windows. The French 
windows on the first floor were framed by decorative wooden 
shutters that seemed superfluous, but Jay took the architect’s 
advice and left them intact. He supervised a meticulous 
transformation that removed all traces of the previous owner, a 
cardiganed widow whose right hand convulsed in a constant 
twitch. Six months later, on 22 June 1982, he sat on a packing 
crate in the hallway inhaling the scent of fresh paint, the smell 
of optimism and new beginnings, and it seemed to Jay as if this 
renovation might erase the memory of all the other places that 
had cluttered up his life. 
It was nearly twenty years now since he had stood on the 
threshold of his safe space trying to view the arrangements 
through the eyes of his first English patient. He wondered if he 
would discover some sort of cultural variance, but it turned out 
that his clients would always be the same, all looking to make 
sense out of chaos, none of them seeing that meaninglessness 
is liberation. They seemed, however, to take comfort in Jay’s 
foreignness, as if his alien status was in keeping with the 
exoticism of a therapeutic relationship. For some, like Cora, it 
had a particular resonance. In the closing minutes of her second 
session she told him that her husband was American. ‘East 
Coast though,’ she added with emphasis. In the old days Jay 
would have made a client explore this type of remark, dwell on 
what it meant, encouraged her to see that there are no innocent 
conversational gambits, but he’d long since abandoned the 
rigour of his formal training in favour of a more individual 
1 7 


PAGE 26:
Aifric Campbell 
approach. In a sense, as a client once peevishly complained, Jay 
wasn’t really an analyst at all. 
‘Larry’s a banker,’ Cora explained. 'He’s back working in 
New York at the moment. Comes home at weekends.’ And for a 
moment Jay had a vision of Larry backlit on a Hampton 
shoreline, white surf licking the curve of his blanched toes. He 
picked up his pen and wrote: 
Therapy a& adultery 
Cora’s simultaneous confirmation and denial of his connec¬ 
tion with her husband was, Jay believed, an expression of her 
discomfort at being on the brink of a secret intimacy, but he left 
this obvious intervention unsaid. ‘Yes, I am from the West 
Coast,’ he nodded and as he uttered the words, he was 
reminded how surprising it was that even after so many years 
in London, there were still mundane sensual pleasures he 
missed: the dry crumble of Hershey’s chocolate, the warm feel 
of a dime, the mournful bellow of a fog horn over the mist-thick 
Bay, the clinking lap of water underneath the weathered pier 
boards. Most of all, he missed the sea, a whole geography of 
sea. For Jay had discovered years ago that London had the 
landlocked quality of Moscow when his first southbound crawl 
through the shocking ugliness of the city’s boundaries led him 
to England’s dismal coastline, where the old flee to count out 
their days in the bleak seaside towns of Eastbourne, 
Littlehampton, Worthing, Bexhill-on-Sea - names with the ring 
of finality about them, all those clipped vowels that the English 
stifle, as if an open mouth could unleash some monstrous 
slack-jawed passion. He drove slowly along the coast, through 
towns connected by a continuous loop of bungalows whose 
dormer eyes reflected the invisible view to France. Couples 
picnicked in the safety of their cars, staring in wordless 
communion through the windscreen at the watery 


PAGE 27:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
Mediterranean parody; men sat on park benches, their pink 
skulls shiny in the cold spring sun as they gazed but on a 
bifocalled view of the rolling swell while, behind them, vacant 
B&B signs creaked in the incessant wind and trains spilled 
hopeful weekenders into a terminus of pedestrianised streets 
where Poundstretchers offered a refuge from the rain until 
evening fell and frightened visitors high-tailed it back to the 
city’s comforting embrace, away from the horrors of the senior 
citizen future that awaited them. Throughout the eighties there 
had been a steady stream of women who were determined to 
prove the beauty of the English countryside and dragged Jay on 
misguided day trips that ended in a red sweep of taillights 
stretching out through the motorway darkness that enveloped 
them. 
He was fascinated by the charmless reality of England, its 
embarrassing lack of majesty. 
A streetlamp sputtered into fragile life outside the window. It 
seemed the rain had ceased; Jay could hear a surge of water 
gurgle in the drain and the cleaners brushing a slow receding 
sweep along the footpath. Turning to the next blank page in the 
case book he wrote: 
9th/}&mu>yv 
flight 
Cora was not the first client to have fled from an unpalatable 
truth. There were always trauma risks involved in the 
premature unveiling of the unconscious and, in other circum¬ 
stances, Jay might have held out for longer. Today, however, 
frustrated by lack of progress, he had felt that it might be a 
gamble worth taking, but now his client had gone, leaving him 
with an empty stage. He looked over at the Picasso and a 
l 9 


PAGE 28:
Aifric Campbell 
certain symmetry between the mutilated female body and 
Cora’s panicked departure. Seventy minutes of unscheduled 
afternoon stretched out before him, plenty of time to trawl her 
case notes for inspiration, but there was the intrusion of this 
evening’s appointment whose imminent approach resonated 
through his day with the persistent hum of a tuning fork. 
Turning his head to the mantelpiece, he considered the 
source of his unease. Dana Flynn’s letter had lost its crisp 
surprise, the paper was soft and malleable from overuse, for he 
had shuttled it back and forth between his study and the safe 
space like a dog unable to find a suitable spot to bury his bone. 
Since its arrival three weeks ago, Jay had found himself contin¬ 
ually ambushed by reminiscence which presented as a sort of 
arrhythmia that disrupted the familiar beat of his days. Only 
this morning he’d caught himself holding his breath on 
awakening and lay suffocating between the sheets, wondering if 
his autonomic responses had failed for his chest was bursting 
with noxious gas and he had to force himself to exhale. 
‘In the course of my research into a group of European 
scientists and philosophers who settled in the United States 
during World War Two,’ wrote Dana Flynn, ‘I came across some 
correspondence with your brother Robert, during the period 
when he was a student of the famous logician Alfred Tarski at 
Berkeley.’ 
Standing in the hallway, the envelope crushed in his palm, 
Jay was overwhelmed by a startling rush of recall, like a sudden 
and exhilarating change in temperature. It was May 1970 and 
he’d slipped into the back of a lecture theatre where Robert 
Hamilton, Professor of Philosophy at the University of 
California at Los Angeles and Jay’s dead brother, stood in the 
centre of the sunken podium. The blackboard behind him was a 
jungle of calculus. 
‘Einstein,’ he declared, ‘was one of the two great frauds of 
20 


PAGE 29:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
the twentieth century.' 
The transcribing students raised their heads. Robert 
grinned, ran a hand through his thinning hair, his unbuttoned 
collar revealing an unshaven neck and a new flabbiness about 
the chin. A girl sitting in the front row raised her hand. 
‘Professor Hamilton, who was the other one?’ 
‘Now that would be Freud,’ said Robert, rubbing his chalk- 
smeared hands, ‘but my younger brother up there in the back 
row might disagree.’ 
The audience looked round but Jay had already turned away, 
left the double doors swinging in an air rush behind him and 
strode out into the campus heat. He sat down in the speckled 
shade of a massive oak whose grey trunk was scarred with 
leprous scabs and watched a gaggle of students trail behind a 
lone protest banner, heading across the lawns towards Dickson 
Plaza. It was the beginning of the end, America’s ignominious 
retreat from Vietnam. 
‘Hey,’ said Robert, tapping him on the shoulder, ‘don’t take 
it all so seriously.’ 
Jay rose and followed him along the path, past a grove of 
myrtle trees that peeped out from the side of Dodd Hall like a 
troupe of ballerinas, their slender torsos stretched uniformly 
upwards. He reached out to stroke a scarlet blossom, its soft 
bottlebrush spikes coating his palm with a sticky citrus scent. 
‘But you know what?’ said Robert, stopping to polish his 
glasses on a shirttail. ‘I’m still waiting for you to give up that 
psychobabble and get into real science.’ 
Jay thrust a gummy fist deep into his pocket. The eighteen- 
year age gap between the brothers had created a lingering 
relationship ambiguity which he had long since understood to 
be rooted in the absence of a paternal experience and his own 
childish attempts to endow Robert with the crown of a father 
who had been somehow lost when Jay was about two years old, 
2 1 


PAGE 30:
Aifric Campbell 
in circumstances which were never satisfactorily explained by 
their mother. 
‘That’s life,’ she said, as if this could cover it, as if hoards of 
fathers were abandoning their families every day. 
As a young child Jay had studied the wedding photo that he 
found hidden face-down in her bedside drawer, a sepia 
representation mounted in flimsy brown card where the bride 
appeared like a silhouette in an ankle-skimming skirt, her face 
obscured by a cloche hat, a fringed shawl draped over her 
shoulders. It seemed as if, already on his wedding day, the 
groom had realised his mistake, for Frederic Hamilton stood 
beside her, his moustache drooping above a wild grin that 
smacked of panic, even to the six-year-old observer. A chain 
sneaked out from the pocket of an oversized waistcoat and 
disappeared underneath his jacket. ‘That watch was loaned,’ his 
mother sniffed. ‘Everything was borrowed just for the day.’ 
Although he could not truthfully claim any personal 
recollections of his father. Jay sometimes noticed that the smell 
of stale tobacco jarred inexplicably. He had a memory of a 
shadowy presence by the screen door on 1152 Woodward 
Street and a rough-palmed grip that was looser than a two-year- 
old was accustomed to. There was a fingerprint in the fine film 
of dust gathered on the shoulders of a black suit jacket that 
hung from a peg at the back of his mother’s wardrobe, brown 
strands of fossilised tobacco sweetening the pocketed air. But 
Jay could not be sure if these were memories at all, or if it was 
just the absence of presence that he remembered, all the things 
that didn’t happen, walking scrub-kneed to church on Sundays 
alongside the click of his mother’s unaccompanied heels, past 
other families who made a perfect set, when the Hamiltons had 
a missing piece, a father who wasn’t dead, only unaccountably 
absent. A deserter. 
He understood early on that there was some sort of hard- 
22 


PAGE 31:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
coded weakness in his father’s genetic script. No backbone, no 
staying power. Frederic Hamilton just wasn’t up to it: the wife, 
the family, the neighbourhood, the business of carving out a 
hard little life and eventually the yoke of responsibility slipped 
off like eager tumbleweed and he drifted along a path of 
increasingly casual labour that snaked across the state line and 
ever eastwards, wiring money back home to stave off his 
discomfort and hold open the possibility of return. This was, as 
far as Jay knew, the pattern that had been established in the 
earliest days of his parents' marriage and one to which his 
mother quickly became accustomed. In fact, it was doubtful if 
Frederic’s absence even bothered her at all, for there were 
compensations. There was Robert to look after, an ever-present 
husband would have used up the energy that she preferred to 
lavish on a more rewarding emotional investment. Over the 
years Frederic’s homecomings became more infrequent, 
although they could not always have been unwelcome, for Jay 
was, of course, conceived during one of these visits - a fact of 
which Frederic Hamilton remained apparently unaware until 
sometime in 1950, when he showed up unannounced at 
Woodward Street and found a new son in diapers on the front 
porch. Robert came high-tailing back from Berkeley as soon as 
he heard and their father turned obligingly on his heel, the door 
slammed in his face by his own son and his own shortcomings. 
But it worked, scared him enough to stay away for good, save 
for the odd card from nowhere in particular, with nothing 
memorable to say. Jay remembered a black-and-white photo of 
a bridge and a postmark from Boston. ‘Lot of big bridges out 
East’, his father had written in careful capitals and his mother 
read it aloud over and over again, laughing until she cried, 
while Jay traced his finger over the meticulous pencil. 
Even as a thin-legged youngster Jay had sensed how 
paternal abandonment could deal a crippling blow to a child’s 
23 


PAGE 32:
Aifric Campbell 
self-esteem, how the mere suspicion of rejection might throw a 
life off its natural trajectory and trigger a slow slide into a 
quagmire of self-loathing and delinquency. So he devised his 
own survival strategy, became a fearless climber, the fastest 
runner on the block. At six years old, he began to explore the 
inland waterways of Northern California, the eighty-mile suck 
from Stockton to the ocean, wondering if his father had one day 
started following the delta’s homeward flow and just kept on 
walking. Which turned out, in fact, not to be the case, he would 
later discover, because Frederic Hamilton had surfaced briefly 
in 1956, in Green River, Utah, one thousand miles in the 
opposite direction, like a gasping seal coming up for air. This 
time his departure was final, the silence punctuated only by the 
occasional card, until his premature demise in December 1969, 
(a heart attack in a hostel in Minneapolis) and the abandoned 
family found an opportunity for closure in the curious satisfac¬ 
tion of death. 
Looking back, Jay congratulated the Hamiltons on handling 
it all so well. His mother had been remarkably sanguine under 
the shade of a cedar in Oakwood Memorial Park. ‘I guess he 
didn't have a clear picture of where he wanted to be,’ she 
murmured, scooping up a handful of earth and drizzling it over 
the open grave. ‘Let’s go,’ said Robert, scraping a heel on the 
grass. None of them guessing that in fifteen months time Jay 
and his mother would be standing there throwing clay on 
Robert's grave; or that nine months after that, she would 
succumb to the cancer that suddenly emerged to gorge itself on 
her breast, her stooped body dragging itself between the chair 
and the bed, fiercely resistant to Jay’s suggestions that she 
should move up to San Francisco so that he could look after her 
more in the hours between his practice. But she stonewalled as 
he knew she would and so he drove the 800-mile round trip to 
her Van Nuys duplex every weekend, fed her chicken soup, 


PAGE 33:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
coaxed her to walk, sat in a hospital armchair and watched her 
slip through his hands and fade away. 
In December 1971, at the age of twenty-three, Jay found 
he'd buried his entire family in the space of two years. 
25 


PAGE 34:
« THREE • ' 
Jay placed Dana Flynn's letter on the mantelpiece and sat down, 
only to immediately stand up again and wedge it in between 
two journals on the top shelf of his bookcase. Such fretting was 
out of character, these days subverted by the relentless assault 
of memory, but a biographer would be looking for colour, 
something that might give flesh to the subject and it was 
undoubtedly this reflexive scanning that has unsettled him, 
triggered a reluctant hunt through buried landscapes and 
unleashed a flock of hidden remembrance, like a wetlands 
beater raising startled fowl for the waiting guns. 
He had immediately recognised Dana Flynn as the author of 
an acclaimed biography of Alan Turing. ‘Still in the top ten,’ 
said the assistant at Waterstone’s on Kensington High Street, 
pointing to the central display table where copies of The Enigma 
were piled high in anticipation of Christmas interest, its consis¬ 
tent sales reflecting an insatiable appetite for sexual intrigue 
and conspiracy theories. She had captured the public imagina¬ 
tion with an accessible treatment of the young British 
mathematician who had predicted that the computer would 
one day rival the brain, the man who had invented a machine to 
decode German intelligence during the second World War, only 
to be abandoned as a security risk by MI6 upon discovery of his 
homosexuality, and who wound up dead at the age of forty-two, 
with a cyanide-laced apple on his bedside table. Although Dana 
Flynn wasn’t by any means the first to throw suspicion on the 
26 


PAGE 35:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
suicide verdict, her - in Jay’s opinion - rather dubiously 
presented closing chapter had triggered a lively newspaper 
debate which he had followed with some interest. 
The Enigma’s dust jacket was frustratingly light on biograph¬ 
ical detail but he concluded that the author was in her early 
thirties, born in Massachusetts, with a PhD in History (Penn 
State). There was no mention of family. She had lectured in 
various undistinguished universities in the US and won a 
couple of fellowships to second-tier institutions. Turing was 
her first book. Turning the opening pages, Jay was irritated to 
find the inscription: To M.E.’ for he disapproved of dedica¬ 
tions, all these books hijacked by cryptic messages, secret 
declarations of love that can only destabilise the intimacy 
between author and reader, as if the entire work was written for 
an unidentified audience of one. 
But despite his reservations about Dana Flynn’s credentials, 
he believed it fitting that his brother was finally receiving some 
attention. The lack of public tributes after Robert’s death had 
been extraordinarily disappointing for Jay had expected a flood 
of posthumous testimonials acknowledging the pioneering 
nature of his brother’s research in logic. After all, Robert had 
been on the verge of revolutionising semantics by providing a 
scientific account of linguistic meaning, applying mathematical 
techniques to natural language and thus explaining what 
philosophers had grappled with for centuries. The sceptics had 
crouched, sniping from the sideline, but, even now, thirty years 
after his landmark publication, Robert’s theoretical framework 
remained the classical paradigm in the study of formal 
semantics. 
Dana Flynn had not been at all forthcoming about the 
specific nature of her interest and her reply to Jay’s email had 
been frustratingly evasive. If Alfred Tarski - Robert’s teacher in 
the Philosophy Department at Berkeley in the early 1950s - was 
27 


PAGE 36:
Aifric Campbell 
the primary focus of her attention, surely one of his many 
pupils would scarcely warrant more than a footnote in a 
biography. But a nagging curiosity prompted Jay to agree to a 
meeting during her visit to London. Since Robert's death in 
1971, he had been contacted by two other researchers, which 
he presumed was due to the fact that all of his brother’s papers 
had been bequeathed to the Special Collections library at 
UCLA. The first enquiry was a phone call from a mathemati¬ 
cian at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology looking for 
any unpublished material that might have escaped the archives. 
The other was from an Oxford professor working on a 
biography of some minor British mathematician who was an 
occasional house guest of Robert’s in Los Angeles in the early 
sixties, but the scrawled request was so gracelessly composed 
that Jay didn’t respond, although he vividly recalled an evening 
in the summer of 1964, when the mathematician in question 
had argued with Robert about his theoretical claims. 
It had been Jay’s first visit to the city and he was sixteen 
years old when he boarded the rumbling Greyhound at 
Stockton in a dry and dusty dawn. Rolling southbound along 
the 1-5, through the flatlands of central California, endless 
miles of irrigated pastureland, his chin lolled on his chest and 
he drifted into sleep, waking with a start as the interstate rose 
out of grey scrubland into the first promise of beauty. 
Afternoon shadows slid over the crinkled ridges of the San 
Emigdio Mountains, thumbprints of vegetation clung to the 
rocks as they circled upwards towards a view of some sort of 
Steinbeckian utopia and, in the distance, Los Angeles erupted 
out of the cracked skin of the desert as the terminus of dream. 
Jay’s first glimpse of 3840 North Beverly Drive was from the 
window of his brother’s Mustang after they took a slow 
northeast route from the campus, stalling somewhere on 
Sunset, Robert squinting over the arc of his big white wheel, 
28 


PAGE 37:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
oblivious to the tooting cars as they cruised through the 
manicured opulence of Beverly Hills. They sailed along the 
boulevards of palm and jacaranda and big leaf maple where 
stuccoed mansions hid behind the huge wrought-iron gates 
that advertised their exclusivity, where the distant splash of 
concealed pools was screened by impenetrable hedges and dogs 
and guards patrolled the neuroses and torments of the stars. 
The creeping spread of celebrity was already like a choking vine. 
Up, up they climbed into the lush seclusion of the foothills and 
it felt to Jay like falling into a dream, Robert’s enthusiastic 
monologue spilling out of the open windows into Coldwater 
Canyon where the houses were carved into mesas and orange- 
tipped poppies bobbed in rocky ledges. The buildings petered 
out long before the intersection with Mulholland and they 
slowed down, turned a sharp right into a narrow drive bordered 
on both sides by jagged walls of greyish stone. A steep slope led 
up to a small brown two-storey with a low-slung pitched roof 
and a white door bearing the number 3840. 
This is home,' said Robert, opening the car door and Jay 
marvelled at the choice of location. Robert shrugged with that 
older brother smile of his, possessing not just great intellect 
but now also apparently great wealth, which was how it seemed 
to Jay. He stood for a while on the drive underneath the alders 
in this little oasis tucked high above the city, never dreaming 
that he would find himself standing in that very spot seven 
/ - 
years later, wedged in by the police cars that blocked the mouth 
of the drive. 
Later that night a handful of Robert’s colleagues from the 
Philosophy Department sat in the backyard and sucked on 
warming beer while Jay lurked in the shadows, bemused, 
confused and very drunk, struggling to disguise his youthful¬ 
ness from the jaded eyes of his brother’s friends. A man 
appeared in front of him wagging a finger, ‘You look soooo like 
29 


PAGE 38:
Aifric Campbell 
him, you know, so like,’ he mumbled and lurched away. 
‘What I mean is this,’ Robert said to a slender figure in a 
brown shirt who leant unsteadily against the wall of the house. 
‘Any four-year-old child is already a linguistic genius, OK? So 
let’s not worry about how or why this happens, let's leave that 
to the others for the moment. The question I’m asking is: how 
do you describe that competence?’ His voice had reached a 
hectoring pitch that brought a lull to the small group. ‘What is 
our theory of language?’ he continued. ‘Build me a model that 
shows how it works. Explain what’s going on.' 
‘I beg your pardon, but isn’t that exactly what Noam 
Chomsky has done up at MIT?’ said the brown shirt in a clipped 
British accent. The group tittered. 
‘No,’ barked Robert. ‘He has done nothing of the sort. 
Everyone’s saying that he’s brought science and method to the 
study of language, but his only interest is in syntax. This so- 
called Chomskyan revolution has no rigour, no adequacy, and it 
is unforgivably inelegant.’ 
‘Yeah right,’ quipped a voice from the deck. 
‘Chomsky leads nowhere,’ Robert continued impatiently. 
‘He thinks semantics is a branch of psychology! But linguists 
are not capable of answering the really important questions. 
The analysis of language properly belongs to mathematics and 
that is what I intend to do: solve the mystery of meaning.’ 
‘An explanation of humanity,’ sneered the brown shirt, 
wiggling a beer can in front of his face. 
‘Why not?’ said Robert, throwing his gleeful arms skywards. 
‘Perhaps there is no theoretical difference between natural and 
artificial language.’ 
The Englishman laughed, swayed briefly in the centre of the 
yard and folded into a corner. Jay lunged down the steps to 
throw up in the midnight foliage and collapsed into an aching 
sleep, only to be woken hours later by a hot plunge of 
30 


PAGE 39:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
anonymous wetness in his ear and Robert’s high-pitched giggle 
cutting through the post-party silence. ‘For Chrissake leave him 
alone, it’s my kid brother,' and they rustled away sniggering in 
the dark leaves. 
Jay stood up abruptly and the casebook slipped from his lap 
onto the floor. This exhumation was surely the source of his 
difficulties. It was as if a lid was creaking open on his vaporous 
past and old unwelcome phantoms were slipping out to invade 
the present. His resuscitated brother was gliding towards him, 
gathering up the years. Every time he sat down in his study to 
write. Jay experienced a peculiar breathlessness as if he had run 
some great distance. In his armchair attending to a client, he 
noticed an uncharacteristic restlessness that he associated with 
vigilance, like the twitching ears of a dog who senses some far- 
off storm. 
He picked up Cora’s case book, tucked it under his elbow 
and stepped into the hall. Perhaps, he thought, a certain order 
and focus would be restored after tonight’s meeting. He would 
find out what Dana Flynn wanted and then, when his duty was 
expedited, he would be able to resume his work. 
He turned his key in the lock and placed it on the top of the 
narrow ledge of the doorframe, for the room was strictly off- 
limits to anyone other than clients, there was a risk of contami¬ 
nation, of the professional spilling into the personal. Years 
before, Jay had discovered the pitfalls of inadequate delineation 
when a woman he brought home, emboldened by a night’s 
champagne, had thrown herself on the couch and swept a wrist 
across her brow in mock anguish, as if what unfolded in this 
place was some sort of charade, while Jay stood with a clenched 
jaw, unable to move lest he grab her flimsy shoulders and hurl 
her out onto the street. 
3 l 


PAGE 40:
• FOUR * 
Jay’s study was a small but perfect square, expertly carved out 
of the drawing room that spanned the entire first floor of the 
house. The herringbone parquet had been restored to a high 
gloss varnish and an original fireplace removed to accommo¬ 
date the wall of customised cupboarding that housed his 
casebooks behind lockable sliding doors. French windows to 
the front overlooked Edwardes Square gardens that lay now 
submerged in the darkness of late afternoon. 
Jay sat down in a high-backed leather chair and rolled into 
position at his desk. The printed manuscript sat squat and 
expectant under a halo of lamplight. 
TALES FROM THE SAFE SPACE 
by 
J. Merritt 
He slid a hand over its pristine body, considering its spareness 
and then placed Cora Miller’s casebook beside it so that their 
edges were abutting, as if she might be encouraged by this 
abundance, find the plot that awaited her and burst into life. 
Cora was, of course, unaware that she had been chosen as 
model and muse for the centrepiece story in the collection that 
would follow the two highly acclaimed novels by J. Merritt: 
Jay’s literary alter ego and one of the best-kept identity secrets 
in the London publishing world. His agent and publisher had 
expressed some reservations about this change in tack, citing 
32 


PAGE 41:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
the British public’s lack of enthusiasm for short stories, but 
they were prepared to indulge as long as J. Merritt’s second 
novel. White Space, was firmly entrenched in the bestseller lists. 
As a nineteen-year-old psychology major at Berkeley in the 
late sixties, Jay had figured out what Freud might perhaps have 
thought but never actually said, that the clinical practice of 
psychoanalysis generates ideal material for the creative writer. 
It was art, Jay believed, to which Freud had truly aspired, his 
lifelong passion for literature fused so exactly with his scientific 
ambition and a wistful longing to unite the two in a feverish 
embrace. Although his essay on creative writers and day¬ 
dreaming was a personal favourite, Jay had long ago concluded 
that Freud was, in the end, both failed writer and analyst, torn 
between the conflicting strictures of two camps. The reluctant 
doctor spent his entire life stubbornly insisting on the scientific 
basis of psychoanalysis, so blinkered was he after fifteen years 
studying the central nervous system of fish. And so, while Jay 
could successfully treat his clients in a therapeutic environ¬ 
ment, he felt that by incorporating them into his fiction, he 
could reach a far wider audience and might even succeed where 
Freud had failed in the integration of science and art. 
J. Merritt’s first two books had been expansive, rich and 
luxuriant. But lately he had come to find the sprawl of the novel 
unseemly, endless pages of dissection and narrative, flesh 
picked over and laid bare. Now, mindful of the dangers of 
increasing age and having too much to say and convinced, as he 
was, that most books, films, conversations and, without 
question, all therapeutic alliances were far too long, Jay planned 
to raise the tension with eleven short stories based upon 
selected case histories. Rigour and discipline, he had decided, 
with plenty of silent space for the readers to do some work. He 
sought brevity and restraint, stories so aggressively minimalist 
that the reader must strain to fill in the gaps and so live the 
3 3 


PAGE 42:
Aifric Campbell 
story, shape the life. Tales from the Safe Space would have none of 
the pomposity of a novel, it would be a series of tight vignettes, 
loosely connected by the theme of maternal neglect, which he 
hoped would provoke some controversy in the literary pages. 
Like bloated bodies rising to the surface, Jay’s clients 
emerged from the pages of his casebooks and stumbled onto 
centre stage in his collection of stories. There was Lola, for 
example, a client from way back in San Francisco whose chronic 
addiction to douche bags had so disrupted the bacterial culture 
of her vagina that she developed severe recurrent thrush and, 
eventually, amenorrhea. On page 67 of Tales she appeared re¬ 
incarnated as Ruth, whose hygiene obsession was part of a 
regime of self-harm designed to blot out the emotional bruising 
left by an abusive mother. 
Sometimes Jay would find himself confronted by a character 
who had featured in his clients’ dramas, a mother or father or 
husband who might have strictly a walk-on role, a soundbite of 
colour, the silver flash of the underside of a fish. Like Cora’s 
husband, for example. Larry had been carefully excised from 
her life and repositioned on page 117, at the moment before he 
met her. It was the image of a pair of salt-stained Docksides on 
the Hamptons shoreline and the screech of wheeling gulls that 
made Jay see Larry as he believed Hopper would have presented 
him - half-formed, waxen, emblematic - to an audience 
scouring their backyards for a sign of pathos. 
In the mid-nineties, just before the publication of J. Merritt’s 
second novel, Jay had toyed with the idea of creating what 
might amount to a new literary genre, the invention of a 
psychoanalyst to rival the crime sleuths, those amateur 
detectives who satisfy the populist desire for explicable motive. 
For months he had laboured with a mulish energy but the voice 
34 


PAGE 43:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
of an impostor mocked him from the page and he was forced to 
admit defeat when he found himself mired in the kind of 
narrator dilemma that he associated with creative writing 
classes, where sensitive undergrads groom the shabby disguise 
of their autobiographical disasters like primates checking each 
other for lice. But he did discover an extraordinary talent for 
reproducing the client. It seemed that he could effortlessly tune 
into the frequencies of the distressed, sounds inaudible to 
another ear and it was this quality that quickly built J. Merritt’s 
reputation. Jay had therefore kept his writing safely client- 
centred until fifteen months ago when he opened his laptop 
one evening and the voice that had eluded him years before 
strutted across the screen: Tales from the Safe Space had arrived 
from nowhere. For a year, Jay worked on his anonymous 
analyst, flexing the writing muscle just as he might fine-tune 
another part of his body, it was like twisting a long-wave radio 
dial, minute precision movements until he finally hit perfect 
pitch. He took out his casebooks and set himself the exhila¬ 
rating challenge of nailing each life in 1,500 words. It was a 
warming-up exercise for his collection, he never wrote the full 
story until he was ready and then did so in one final burst of as 
many hours as it took. 
Jay turned to page 39 of the manuscript and smiled down at 
‘Homo Erectus’, the story of Brian, who nursed a desperate 
nostalgia for all that had been lost the very first time a hominid 
/ 
climbed down from a tree, stretched out a prehensile limb and, 
finding the sensation so pleasing, forgot he was a quadroped 
and stayed erect forever. For weeks, Brian sat hunched in the 
Corbusier, although Jay suspected that he was sneaking around 
on all fours at home, terrified of the fearfulness that had never 
left him since the day his mother had stood up after Christmas 
dinner with the tearful promise, ‘I won’t be back.' She had been 
as good as her word for twenty years. In a later session, Brian 
3 5 


PAGE 44:
Aifric Campbell 
suggested coyly that he might be more comfortable on the 
floor, but Jay refused to entertain this idea and watched him 
lope off northwards through Edwardes Square with the long- 
armed looseness of his ancestors. The transference was 
working, accelerating even, and within weeks, Brian had locked 
onto Jay as the mother object, the focal point of his affection. 
He was inching closer, looking hungrily at Jay’s lap and eventu¬ 
ally confessed to a dream of sitting right there in his maternal 
embrace, being lovingly caressed and de-loused. But Jay knew 
that Brian’s rage would soon be unleashed with all the 
vengeance of the spurned child, that he would need to crush his 
mother’s windpipe until she became silent and submissive in 
death and could never, ever, abandon him again. So Jay referred. 
Brian was put on anti-psychotics and, in the process, he found 
another therapist willing to hold his paw and start the tape all 
over again, so that he could stall any forward momentum and 
stay cocooned in his nursery pain. 
The neon eye of his sleeping laptop pulsed in the shadowy 
outreaches of the desk. Jay opened Cora’s casebook. During his 
psychoanalytic training, Metzling had encouraged the class to 
make detailed notes straight after each session, like how a 
suicide fantasist sat in a chair, or how a depressive avoided eye 
contact. Jay used to fill pages with his clients’ free associations, 
tracing the footprints of their childhoods, the forgotten tastes 
and sensations that lingered between the shadowlands of 
memory and imagination, until he realised the futility of it all, 
the stunning irrelevance of truth. After all, even Freud had 
admitted that it was the imagined past he was seeking, that 
biographical truth could be left to the historians. These days 
Jay’s notes were outline sketches, a series of fragments, 
sometimes just single words that blossomed into the stories 
36 


PAGE 45:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
they might later become. An impressionistic starting point was 
all he needed to begin. The light sharpened, a plot slowly 
emerged and then he could stop listening to the client and 
simply select what suited. Occasionally, he might intervene and 
lead the story where he wanted. If historical truth was already 
an impossible concept, who could be a reliable witness to their 
own life? So when the patient started to deviate from the plot, 
Jay steered them back with the suggestion of unexplored 
feelings, repressions they never knew existed. It only took a 
little prompting to unleash a fury over the dim past - an 
explosion of retrospective anger is a wonderful sight, the 
northern lights of a therapy session. 
He recalled how Metzling would sit stroking his squirrel-red 
beard while he scanned the windowless room, inviting his 
fledgling analysts to consider the dramas that would unfold 
when they became the witnesses and collaborants, the 
architects of other peoples’ futures. It was an elaborate game 
play, this business of containing one another’s pain when they 
congregated for afternoon group sessions, seven plastic chairs 
arranged in a little circle of hell. Jay was astounded at the depth 
of his classmates' engagement, it was a compulsion to seek out 
and endure the pain that had so nearly crushed them, like 
enthusiastic terriers with their noses stuck in a rabbit hole. He 
used to wonder if their stock of empathy would ever run out, or 
was it like myosis, could they simply grow new cells? Month 
after month they rummaged about in the past, looking for 
something that might assuage their boundless appetite for 
distress. ‘Physician heal thyself,’ he whispered at the end of his 
first year and that is what Jay would always see in every analyst 
he met. Years of practice had convinced him that the mining of 
the past was generally useless in the business of learning to be 
happy and he didn’t believe it was empathy or containment that 
patients needed, or even very much attentive listening, it was 
37 


PAGE 46:
Aifric Campbell 
solutions and practical advice. But no one at the SFSP was 
interested in talking about coping strategies or the possible 
value of defence systems, they were all hooked on repression, 
believing that everything must be forced into the open and that 
all paths lead back to the infant at the breast. 
In his own analysis, which was mandatory as part of his 
training, Jay learned to manage the transference and the 
counter-transference. It seemed there was little to stir up and 
what was there, he could control in a carefully calibrated editing 
process, although Metzling got close once and looked him in 
the eye. ‘You make me uneasy in a way I can’t quite explain,’ he 
said. Jay could have told him it was like shouting in a 
soundproofed room where all the noise is absorbed by the 
containing walls. 
He reached for Tales and flicked a thumbnail backwards and 
upwards through the crisp manuscript. A searing white abyss 
glared back at him from the blank pages where Cora’s story 
should be and as the paper gunned past, he felt a dizzying sense 
of motion, a slight lurch, like a corner taken too fast and he 
thought he heard a moan outside. He pushed back from the 
desk and stood up, stepped over to the French windows where 
the pavement below him glistened under the street lights. 
Headlights flared around the northern corner of the gardens, it 
was a procession of nocturnal parkers fleeing the sea of stalled 
traffic on the High Street, barging their way into the square like 
wild boar thrashing about for truffles. The convoy was already 
eight cars deep at six o’clock. All week the square had been 
packed - it was the countdown to Christmas and Kensington 
had been transformed into a retail paradise where spotlit 
consumables twinkled in the windows and gridlocked 
nightshoppers swarmed the wide pavements. It was the 
38 


PAGE 47:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
tranquil affluence of Edwardes Square that had attracted him 
twenty years ago, its polite absence of neighbourliness, the 
illusion of community. The genteel residents preferred their 
private business to be discreet - ‘For Sale’ boards were frowned 
upon by the Committee, as was the practice of opening up the 
gardens to an annual public viewing. But a tide of investment 
bankers had kick-started its eighties renaissance almost 
immediately after Jay moved in. He witnessed the slow exodus 
of the natives as old English money surrendered to the lure of 
the new and the eastern and western flanks were prised from 
the reluctant clutches of owners who could no longer argue 
against the preposterous logic of profit. They finally buckled at 
the shrill insistence of City boys who roared into the square in 
their sports cars for dashabout viewings at inconvenient times, 
bounding up the stairs and dispensing with any attention to 
detail. Jay watched it all from his French windows, imagining 
the straight-backed lady owners fiddling with flower arrange¬ 
ments on their dining-room tables while the scrubbed young 
men strode out through the front doors to collar estate agents 
on the pavement with their outrageous bids. The ladies 
fingered their brooches, eavesdropping through the letterboxes 
that shielded them from the thrilling vulgarity of price and the 
young men rolled up their shirt sleeves and sped off eastwards 
to scream down the phones at other young men in New York 
and Tokyo, leaving the ladies to linger in the dark hallways long 
after they were gone, running their hands over the chipped 
dado rail, the scuffed gloss of a skirting board, the worn carpet 
that led along the hallway through the three-hundred-year 
bowels of the house and out into a world that was being 
completely re-evaluated. No one knew what anything was 
worth anymore and it was all very unnerving, these deep 
currents in the smug waters of wealth. 
All through the eighties Jay watched builders’ vans clog the 
3 9 


PAGE 48:
Aifric Campbell 
narrow one-way system in the early morning, as a procession of 
skips carted away the entrails of the past to make room for a 
more robust future. Nannies lolled on tartan picnic rugs while 
their charges explored the gated lawns. Fleets of SUVs revved 
their impatient engines on Friday afternoons, like a herd of 
stampeding buffalo departing for weekend homes in the West 
Country. In springtime the houses were swathed in wisteria, 
front gardens bloomed with magnolia and cherry blossom 
whose white petals showered the uneven flagstones. Jay came 
to savour the August solitude when the square shimmered 
empty and abandoned in the heat, while the absent residents 
lay gasping at their rental view of the Tuscan hills, or nibbled 
lobster in Nantucket, or hurled a cabriolet along the cliff road 
to St Tropez and the gardens sighed, a sanctuary in the heart of 
the city. 
The convoy stalled on the street below him as the First car 
reversed into a parking bay, the smell of exhaust from the 
throbbing engines seeping into the room. Jay stepped away 
from the window, a little chagrined for the quiet streets and a 
certain authenticity that had vanished. 
He turned back to the desk and closed the open casebook, 
imagining Cora teetering on the edge of Kensington High 
Street, washed by a wave of traffic spray. Perhaps she had fled 
to Laekin, perhaps the doctor would call Jay tomorrow with his 
nervous assessment, confess his natural squeamishness in the 
face of emotional distress and admit he’d written out a 
prescription for some anti-depressants that would take two 
weeks to have any effect. 
‘You know you must see your doctor for that,’ Jay had 
replied when Cora asked about drugs in her third session. 
‘Perhaps you are asking for my approval?’ 
40 


PAGE 49:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
‘I thought maybe taking something... that it could give 
some relief.’ 
‘Perhaps you think it might help you forget everything that 
you are bringing up in this space?’ he said, for Jay believed in 
medication only in extremis: lose the alertness and you often 
lose the battle. Clients bellowed for the heavy fog of SSRIs, 
desperate to insulate themselves from raw emotion, to be 
relieved of the burden of living. Lately, he had developed a 
particular interest in the delicate precipice of breakdown, he 
was captivated by the profound clarity of the disturbed mind, 
how a tangled ribbon of distorted logic could lead, for example, 
to the most eloquent argument for suicide. He found himself 
increasingly engaged by the immediacy of suffering, the agony 
of being perpetually on the edge of disintegration. It was a 
fascination with the critical moment before, when the trembling 
edifice of those elaborate defences that barricade the conscious 
from the unconscious, besieged for a lifetime by the slow build¬ 
up of relentless pressure, finally collapses under the spectacular 
weight of flood water and the client is swept away. He was 
intrigued by the unpredictability of outcome: a client could 
swim to shore and be saved; she might perish, succumb to the 
comforting embrace of oblivion, or she could plunge into an un¬ 
medicated freefall, retreat into the limbo of diagnosable illness, 
and Jay would lose interest. Switch off. Refer. 
The fact remained that medicated patients quickly became 
dull. It was a faustian exchange that left them pliable and 
incurious, trading human experience for the frozen wastes of a 
numb monotony. In 1997, towards the tail end of his socialising 
tolerance, Jay had attended a dinner in the River Room at the 
Savoy where a well-known psychiatrist had slumped into the 
chair beside him, chewing on a plump cigar. ‘You’re an 
American,’ he slurred, knocking over the water glass. ‘Your lot 
started this love affair with Prozac, opium for the masses and 
41 


PAGE 50:
Aifric Campbell 
all that. Depression, scourge of modern man,’ he prodded Jay 
with a belligerent hiccup. ‘You chaps think you invented it. Bet 
you didn’t know that there was a paper written here in London 
by an English doctor a hundred and fifty years ago about the 
explosion in the so-called democratic disease. Blamed it on the 
pressure of modern life: too much travel, too fast, too much 
choice. Hah! Plus fa change,’ he concluded and a heavy hand 
crashed down on the tablecloth between them. 
42 


PAGE 51:
* FIVE • 
In the centre of the ensuite stood a cavernous cedarwood tub 
that Jay had chosen for its angular minimalism but never used, 
for he was unable to feel comfortable with the idea of soaking 
in his own filth. Instead he showered, screened by a sheet of 
clear glass that spanned the length of one wall. His refurbish¬ 
ment of the house had revealed the inadequacies of the English 
plumbing system where the unpressurised hot water output 
delivered a niggardly dribble and, insisting on a flow rate of 
seventeen litres per minute. Jay arranged for a five-bar pump to 
be imported from the US, where the business of personal 
hygiene was accorded due importance. It was true, he thought 
as he plugged in his shaver, that the bathroom had the opulent 
austerity of a Japanese hotel. ‘Very impersonal’, a transient 
redhead once remarked when she strayed in to finger the tub in 
that louche manner of hers that was reminiscent of a feral child. 
Female guests were always invited to use the second 
bathroom and although this request left them initially 
surprised and sometimes even a little wounded, any reluctance 
was transformed when they inspected the arrangements - a 
vast white oval Spoon bath sculpted from a resin composite, 
whose deep matt curves sloped downwards to rest on the 
sandstone floor and a row of glass-fronted cabinets with soaps 
and shampoos and bath emollients from L’Occitane, deep-pile 
towels in nutmeg and freshly laundered white kimonos. 
Jay leaned over a shallow ceramic trough and examined his 
43 


PAGE 52:
Aifric Campbell 
freshly shaven jawline in the mirror. Over the years he had 
monitored the gradual emergence of a striking resemblance to 
his brother and now, as he progressed through middle age, it 
seemed as if Robert was coming alive in his face. They shared 
the same perfect oval and a certain dark intensity in the wide- 
set stare - brown eyes flecked with amber, their father’s only 
visible legacy. But lately, what had once appeared like critical 
distinctions between them had vanished. For example, Jay’s 
chin, which had always been broader and more assertive, 
seemed to have collapsed into his brother’s pinched 
afterthought; his nose, once straight and patrician, was 
expanding into an excessive fleshiness about the nostrils; a 
faint scattering of wrinkles marked the side of his forehead, the 
kind of deterioration that was commensurate with a much 
younger man and he remembered how Robert’s porcelain skin 
had been curiously unlined at the time of his death, as if he had 
managed to remain untouched by the frantic business of his 
existence. Jay tugged at his hairline, once a mahogany brown, 
now evenly flecked with grey. At least he wasn’t going bald, a 
process that had begun very early for Robert, a rapid and 
definite retreat that exposed the broad flat plane of his skull. 
He straightened up into the comforting reminder of height 
advantage. At fifteen, Jay had already been a good five inches 
taller than his brother, approaching six feet with wide shoulders 
and strong capable hands. ‘Look at you, you’re twice the man 
I’ll ever be,’ Robert had joked, with a mock stomach punch that 
was puny, almost girlish in contrast. Once, when he was seven, 
Jay surprised him with a baseball bat, dragged him out to the 
backyard where Robert fumbled with the mitt and bowled an 
awkward underarm before recoiling in skittish apprehension 
when his kid brother whacked the ball over his head. 
Jay closed the wardrobe door and checked his reflection in 
the full-length mirror. He was lucky to gravitate effortlessly 
44 


PAGE 53:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
towards a healthy diet and regular exercise and he understood 
the impact of his physical presentation, could read the covert 
glances of admiration from women at other tables in restau¬ 
rants and bars - and most especially, he found, at the theatre. 
But the art of looking good required more rigorous vigilance in 
midlife, he reflected, pinching a thin fold of loose skin on the 
back of his hand. It was the loss of elasticity that he mourned 
most of all, as if the epidermis was announcing the steady 
inevitability of a progressive internal decay. For some months 
after Robert had died, Jay experienced a disproportionate 
interest in biological trivia, a compulsion which he had 
subsequently observed in many bereaved clients and which he 
recognised as one of the myriad responses to a violent or 
sudden death. Graphic images of internal organs - the lungs, 
the liver, the intestines - mocked him from the pages of medical 
textbooks, their lurid reds and blues underscoring the 
cartoonish mechanisms upon which his fragile life depended. 
He read on, nauseated by physiological specifics and the 
saturated colours that leapt out from the illustrations. It was 
his astigmatism, of course, that caused the circulatory system 
to hover above the page like a field of bluebells. In the furtive 
quiet of the library, Jay monitored the secret pump of his heart, 
closing his eyes on a pulsing starburst of veins that called to 
mind an unexplored moment dredged from earliest history, 
when he and some unidentifiable companion swung over a 
battered half-door gawping at the disembowelled viscera of a 
freshly butchered beast, until a man in a brown workcoat 
stained with recent slaughters picked up a handful of steaming 
entrails and flung it at the boys who fled shrieking from the wet 
slap of laughter that pursued them all along the waterway. 
Now, as Jay squared up to his reflection, framed by the 
white shroud of the bedspread behind him, the accelerating 
resemblance to Robert struck him as a sort of theft, as if he was 
4 5 


PAGE 54:
Aifric Campbell 
being burgled of his own identity by the grasping fingers of an 
indomitable presence who refused to be bludgeoned into 
oblivion. ‘How the dead struggle to be remembered,’ Marina 
had sighed on her first session with Jay after the unexpected 
death of her thirty-five-year-old husband. She’d taken to 
spending her nights in a bus shelter on Kensington Gore, 
comforted by the view of Prince Albert who sat alone on his 
refurbished throne watching carloads of black ties arrive for a 
night’s entertainment in his concert hall across the road. 
Marina shivered inside the chilled wrap of her coat, soothed by 
the thought of Queen Victoria in her little black dress, 
distraught with grief and laudanum, caught in the grip of an 
unreasonable longevity, for it would be forty long years before 
she could follow her beloved into the ground. They are looking 
for something of substance,’ Marina insisted, ‘a white cross, a 
street name, a snatch of song that never dies,' and she lapsed 
into silent contemplation of the honours lavished on the 
departed, tributes hurled out over open graves, all the things 
that were never said when hearts were still beating, words 
thudding like clumps of clay on dead ears. 
Jay remembered Robert’s memorial service at UCLA as a 
rather shabby affair. The College’s choice of Kinsey Hall as a 
venue had seemed inappropriately ironic, for it was the scene of 
Robert's triumph two years before when he delivered his 
keynote lecture on semantic theory to an audience of interna¬ 
tional scholars. Their mother had insisted that Jay and herself 
sit in the front row where the delegates took side-swipe views 
of her incongruousness, her neatly coiled henna hair crammed 
into a pillbox, her low-cut blouse revealing a dejected expanse 
of worn cleavage. Earlier that day Jay had glimpsed her through 
a slit in the bathroom door savagely rooting out grey hairs. 
‘Caesar will die,’ Robert had declared. ‘This sentence cannot 
be considered true or false independently of the context of use.' 
46 


PAGE 55:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
Their mother had smiled knowingly, as if his lecture was a 
private joke, as if she understood everything. 
‘I shall not apologise for the fact that my talk will contain 
only proofs, statements and theorems. As a matter of fact, one 
might regard this as a virtue akin to purity.’ A humorous ripple 
spread through the audience. Robert, of course, took 
knowledge very seriously, something that Jay later realised was 
rarely found, even in those at the top of their game. Robert 
believed in limitless possibilities, obstacles were simply plot 
beats or opportunities for lateral thinking, a brief pause for 
breath. Once on Santa Monica beach in the fading light, he had 
flung himself backwards as the evening sand chill crept along 
their legs and said, ‘Everything can be explained. This is a 
physical world.’ He was always full of ruthless advice on how to 
live, a model for the kind of uncompromising home truths that 
Jay sometimes meted out to clients who found themselves 
buried alive under a mountain of their own rubble. Little pricks 
of motivation, journalistic sound-bites on how to achieve fulfil¬ 
ment, like: get up off your ass and stop whining. 
An hour before the Kinsey lecture Jay had called round to 
Robert’s office in Dodd Hall and seen the scathing remarks 
scribbled across an abstract of the speech. Apparently Robert’s 
colleagues were not convinced that he could deliver on such 
radical claims. Natural language was far too unwieldy to be 
subjected to formal analysis they said and warned him against 
flying in the face of a philosophical tradition that went all the 
way back to the Vienna Circle. But Robert rejected all that, 
parting company in happy defiance. At the time. Jay had been 
only peripherally aware of the linguistic wars that had raged 
across America all through the 1960s. It was nothing short of a 
revolution that saw what had previously been considered to be 
a dull backwater emerge at the heart of an epistemological 
battle triggered by Noam Chomsky, whose interest in language 
47 


PAGE 56:
Aifric Campbell 
had developed as he studied the finer points of Hebrew 
grammar at his father’s knee. 
‘I regard the constructions of a theory of truth as the basic 
goal of serious syntax and semantics,’ said Robert, looking 
round the hall, ‘and the developments emanating from MIT 
offer little promise towards that end.’ He paused, leaning 
forward on the lectern. ‘I have what I consider to be a more 
hopeful way of approaching ordinary language than the attempt 
of Chomsky. I believe the kind of model-theoretic work I will 
present to you tonight has considerably more relevance to 
philosophy and ordinary language than many of my critics 
would grant it.’ 
A hush fell on the stunned audience as they gophered 
through pages of voluminous notes, scribbling clarification in 
the margins, staring aghast at Robert’s proofs until their 
pencils lay defeated and they abandoned the pretence of even 
keeping up. He shone brighter and bigger than they could ever 
imagine, he was leaving them all behind in a trail of incompre¬ 
hension. ‘Nothing can be done to make easy reading of 
Hamilton’s writings,’ a mournful reviewer would later conclude 
on the posthumous publication of Robert’s landmark book. 
‘They must be studied slowly and with care. There is little 
concern for the uninitiated reader as well as a notational 
sophistication that makes his fragments of English forbidding 
to non-mathematicians.’ 
After Robert’s lecture had ended the delegates spilled out 
onto the steps as dusk stole across the cropped grass. The 
campus sidewalks were littered with lilac jacaranda blossom 
and a woman in a white dress bent down to scoop up the long 
tubular bells, like crushed silk in her delighted palms. Jay stood 
on the kerb staring up at Kinsey Hall, a 1920s block of elaborate 
sandstone and red brick on the eastern side of UCLA’s central 
quadrangle. It was a pared-down version of the heavyweights, 
48 


PAGE 57:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
Royce Hall and the Powell Library, whose monumental bell 
towers faced each other in mutual regard. A trickle of students 
streamed between the vast arched entrances, hounded by the 
inscriptions that pursued them everywhere, each building 
offering up some rebuke, urging them to transcend their 
grandest dreams. ‘Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold 
things out of thy law', his mother intoned and Jay followed her 
gaze to the words carved above the doors to Kinsey, where 
Robert stood shaking hands with a cluster of colleagues, his 
thin lips stretched wide by an eager smile. She repeated the 
inscription as if committing it to memory. The light was fading 
away, a startled moon pressed against a dirty rose sky, the neat 
rosebushes glowed a brilliant white garland all around the 
building perimeter, a burst of backslapping laughter erupted 
around Robert and a thick damp roll hit the back of Jay’s throat 
as the temperature inched lower, dragging a heavy fog in from 
the ocean. 
Two years later, on 12 March 1971, he had shepherded his 
mother into the front row for Robert’s memorial service, 
disheartened by what he perceived as a lack of dignity in the 
proceedings. Kinsey Hall seemed smaller than he remembered 
and the lecture theatre format lent a voyeuristic feel to the 
occasion. Jay was disappointed at the shuffling attendance and 
put it down to some combination of the unusual circumstances 
of his brother's death, academic rivalry and plain bad manners, 
the insensitivities of a nation that doesn’t appreciate protocol. 
A couple of graduate students stood at the entrance distrib¬ 
uting a single-sided page with a distinctly unflattering head- 
and-shoulders shot of Robert taken from the department 
yearbook, his face barely visible behind ludicrously large 
frames. A stark announcement was laid out in grotesque 
calligraphic script. 
49 


PAGE 58:
Aifric Campbell 
i fla/Wt 12 (971 
f/rh f/esnoria/n 
Merritt. cf(ii/ut7ton, (930— (971 
Jay prised the paper from his mother’s trembling grasp. 
Montgomery Furth, Chairman of the Philosophy Department, 
made his way towards the podium and stood blinking at the 
lectern. 
‘As chairman and colleague,’ he began, ‘I should like to 
express on behalf of the entire intellectual community at 
UCLA, the terrible loss that we have suffered through Robert’s 
premature death. Not only did we value his inestimable 
brilliance and creativity as a scholar and his dedication as a 
teacher, Robert’s work went beyond anything but the most 
rarely encountered.’ He paused, looked up at a point 
somewhere above the audience’s heads. A person with his gifts 
turns up very seldom,’ he continued and Jay immediately 
recognised that the text was borrowed from testimonials 
written ten years before to the Selective Services department 
for the purpose of securing Robert’s exemption from military 
service. Jay had found these documents the previous day, 
buried in the paperwork at 3840 North Beverly. 
One letter began: 
Professor Robert Hamilton is in a critical occupation and is of 
more value to the nation's defense effort in his current position 
than as a draftee in the armed forces. The field of mathematical 
logic in which Professor Hamilton has distinguished himself so 
brilliantly is one that has many applications to issues that arise 
in the higher levels of planning for national defense. Such 
technical talents are of great importance in resolving problems 
in systems development and weapons design. This is evidenced 
by the fact that several of the young men who have done their 
doctoral work under Professor Hamilton’s direction are now 
50 


PAGE 59:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
employed by industrial and research agencies involved in a 
broad range of applications that include the Polaris program as 
well as development projects in artificial intelligence, such as 
voice-controlled weaponry. I would specifically highlight the 
collaborative research that Professor Hamilton has performed 
for the United States Air Force... 
The Chairman touched his brow with a clenched knuckle. A 
restless silence fell on the proceedings, broken only by his 
mother’s slack-jawed breathing, short snatched gasps accompa¬ 
nied by an occasional shudder. ‘Robert’s research,’ he 
continued, ‘was of the highest possible calibre in a field charac¬ 
terized by the most exacting standards. His students and 
colleagues regarded him with awe. He advanced into full 
professorship at UCLA in the highest degree of acceleration 
ever known. Our loss is both terrible and irreparable.’ Furth 
cleared his throat and tugged at his tie. The whole business was 
taking its toll. ‘Finally, let me repeat here what I have already 
communicated to Mrs Hamilton and Robert’s younger brother 
Jay. It is hard to find consolation at such times. But I can assure 
you that Robert’s work, which had already won him interna¬ 
tional renown, will long outlive him and will continue to 
furnish foundations on which others can build for many years 
to come.' 
Jay wondered if it was the unwelcome scent of scandal that 
had unsettled Furth or if he might have seen Robert’s letter of 
protest to the Chancellor just a few weeks before. ‘The 
Chairman’s understanding of the word consensus is not the 
same as mine, which corresponds to the dictionary definition: a 
collective unanimous opinion of a number of persons. Because experi¬ 
ence has taught me the imprudence of allowing views to be 
attributed to me which are not my own, I find I must set down 
the items with which I disagree in the Chairman’s recent 
report.’ 
5 1 


PAGE 60:
Aifric Campbell 
‘What do you think of that?’ Robert had asked Jay, waving 
the letter with a flourish as they drove up through Coldwater 
Canyon after a late pizza in Westwood. 
‘I think you just like stirring it up,’ Jay had replied and 
Robert shook with a laughter that Jay could still hear, a vivid 
windrush that split the humid night with its tireless 
enthusiasm. Their headlights trapped the sparkling eyes of a 
racoon in the darkness while Robert quoted cheerfully from a 
reference he had written on a colleague looking for a position at 
Princeton. ‘The candidate represents the very worst not only in 
philosophy but in scholarship in general. I should call him a 
charlatan if that were not an understatement.’ 
‘You make enemies lightly,’ said Jay. Robert laughed and 
dropped him off at the end of the driveway. 'I only tell the 
truth,’ he said. 
Jay hesitated in the open doorway. A warm breeze blew 
wisps of cottonwood catkins in an aimless drift to the ground. 
‘I’m not coming in,’ said Robert, with that look of wild anticipa¬ 
tion on his cheeks, eyes glittering behind his thick lenses. ‘You 
want to come with me?’ he asked with an ugly leer and Jay 
slammed the door on his brother’s snigger, stood watching as 
he revved the engine and turned the car round, headed for 
Downtown and his private underworld. 
After the memorial service Jay had thanked Furth for his 
eulogy and stood at the head of the receiving line as a human 
shield against his mother’s crumbling performance. The 
amplified bells chimed out across the campus as they emerged 
under a high blue sky and she pointed a quivering hand at the 
towers above Powell. ‘No, no,’ Jay whispered, ‘it’s not for 
Robert, they always ring on the hour.’ She slumped forwards 
with a hideous moan and a neighbour from Van Nuys drew her 
firmly to one side. 
The mourners shuffled down the steps, muttering 
52 


PAGE 61:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
condolences. Jay shook their dismal hands, deflecting the 
unasked questions in their eyes. A colleague of Robert’s whom 
Jay had never met flung herself at his neck and sobbed, ‘Oh, it’s 
all so awful,’ but when he prised her loose he saw that she too 
was looking for an explanation and, although he knew that 
distance insulated him from the poisonous gossip that 
accompanied his brother’s sensational death, Jay could already 
hear the creaking rumour mill, the campus whispers, the seamy 
undertow of sordid suggestion. He could see the spreading 
stain, the ghost of a smirk on Detective Green’s lips as he stood 
off to the side, sucking on a cigarette. 
53 


PAGE 62:
• SIX * 
\ 
At 6:47pm, Jay settled into a wing chair at the Berkeley Hotel in 
Knightsbridge and watched a stiff-shirted waiter approach him, 
one hand folded behind his back. He murmured a greeting and 
as Jay looked up, the words ‘Kir Royale’ unexpectedly sprang to 
his lips, prompted by a vision of pink bubbles so vividly alluring 
that he wondered if he had discovered a new-found longing for 
an aperitif that he despised. ‘The Chardonnay,’ he said and the 
waiter bowed and turned away. 
At a nearby table, a middle-aged American presented a 
detailed account of his day’s business meeting to his wife’s 
glazed contemplation of her champagne. The man crinkled the 
cellophane wrapping of a panatella, the unbroken drone of his 
monologue cutting like a metronome through the sporadic bar 
hum. The woman fingered a pearl necklace around her throat 
and shot Jay a flickering glance. 
The lobby bar at the Berkeley was not a fashionable venue, 
but Jay had chosen it for the generosity of the seating arrange¬ 
ments, the luxury of defining space that facilitated private 
conversation. It was also, he guessed, exactly the kind of choice 
that Dana Flynn would predict for a man of his age - she would 
have done her homework for this meeting and Jay did not 
always favour a strategy of confounding expectations. He 
wondered now if a biographer with a research interest in a 
brilliant scientist might be curious about fraternal difference 
and what, if anything, she thought about the brothers’ 
54 


PAGE 63:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
divergent careers. It had recently occurred to Jay that Robert 
and himself had far more in common than might appear, that in 
fact - unlikely as it might seem - the two of them shared a 
similar purpose. Although, of course, that wasn’t how Robert 
saw it at all in 1966 when Jay announced his long-term 
intention to study psychoanalysis. 
‘I beg you to rethink your decision’, Robert had written in 
urgent reply to Jay’s letter. 
Don’t waste your talents in this field when there are so many 
other worthy possibilities. It is my belief that psychoanalysts 
are charlatans. I cannot endorse an occupation that is devoid of 
intellectual rigor, whose practitioners cultivate vulnerability 
and encourage patients to celebrate their own fragility, so that 
they become afraid to experiment, afraid to live, but most of 
all, afraid to take responsibility for their own lives, preferring 
to blame others for their own shortcomings. If your chosen 
profession continues to exercise the public imagination - and 
sadly I believe it will - you will create a generation that spends 
their whole life bleating about imagined misfortunes that have 
befallen them in childhood, trapped in an unhealthy confusion 
between fact and fiction. Who will be the heroes in this new 
world, where good and evil are no longer held to be matters of 
choice, where grown men and women dedicate their lives to 
idle contemplation of their navels? 
It was, of course, typical of Robert to commit his 
uncensored opinion to the mailbox without a thought for the 
consequences. ‘You mustn’t be too disappointed in this letter. I 
simply have to tell you what I believe to be true.’ Jay had folded 
the notepaper into a tight square and pondered the ruthless¬ 
ness of honesty. Who was it for exactly, this precious gift? 
‘Weigh this great truth in your hand,’ he sometimes urged 
his clients. ‘Who benefits from this venomous dart that 
masquerades as treasure?' 
5 5 


PAGE 64:
Aifric Campbell 
‘You think your wife wants to hear about your little fling?’ 
he’d once asked Alex, who had spent three sessions wallowing 
in the throes of guilt after a month of frantic sex with his 
colleague’s PA. ‘Who needs the truth here?* Jay demanded 
when Alex protested the need to unburden himself to his wife. 
‘We always said there’d be no secrets,’ he whined. ‘That was 
your first mistake,’ said Jay. ‘Secrets are meant to be carefully 
guarded. They conceal the ugly frailty of our humanity.’ 
Alex shook his head, ‘No, no, it's never been like that 
between us.’ Jay leaned forwards, ‘You think your wife wants to 
hear from your lips what she already suspects? And what 
should she do with that knowledge? You want her to choke on 
her humiliation and then beg you to stay so that you can feel 
forgiven? The truth is always for the teller. We spill our guts for 
absolution, so we can sleep easy. We tell the truth because we 
cannot bear to be locked in the vault with our own weakness. 
We tell the truth so that we can slip from under the yoke of 
guilt.’ 
Alex hung his head. 
‘Don’t kid yourself,’ said Jay in the forty-ninth minute. 
For four long years. Jay had endured the weight of his brother’s 
disapproval. Robert had mounted an aggressive campaign to 
dissuade him from his psychoanalytic ambitions, and, in the 
summer before he graduated even hijacked a weekend visit to 
insist Jay attend a Saturday seminar in formal semantics at 
UCLA, in the hope that some exposure to rigorous scientific 
method might change his mind. 
‘The proper application of our labour and effort is in the 
natural sciences,’ Robert had announced, dropping his jacket 
over the back of a chair. He pushed the heavy frames over the 
bridge of his nose and glared up at the audience, a group of 
56 


PAGE 65:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
postgraduate linguists who had heard he was some sort of 
genius who sat in his room in Dodd Hall constructing a great 
theory of language that would change everything. 
“‘Every man loves a woman”,’ he declared. ‘Is this sentence 
ambiguous?’ The students nodded uncertainly, wary of 
stumbling into a logician’s trap. 
‘So where does the ambiguity in the sentence arise? Is it in 
the interpretation of the words “man” or “woman” or “loves”?’ 
The class held its collective breath and sank a little lower into 
their seats. Robert shoved a hand into his pocket, jangled some 
coins. ‘The problem, boys and girls, lies in the interpretation of 
the words “every” and “a”. So today I’m going to demonstrate 
how we solve this problem using a fragment of English.’ The 
audience raised their pens as he snatched at a piece of chalk and 
turned to the blackboard to write: 
TKe'propertreutme^ofquay[tLfux^Mcm/in/ay 
fratynejtfoftngll&K 
‘Let’s take a simple sentence like “Every man talks”. Now 
the usual translation in logic would be 
Vx[S(x) ->-T(x)] 
‘But this is clearly unsatisfactory.’ The class regarded his 
formula in cowed silence. A girl seated in front of Jay turned to 
her classmate and shrugged with a nervous grin, pointing to a 
large question mark with a bubble dot on her open notebook. 
‘So this is the solution I’m going to propose,’ continued 
Robert. 
\Ql\PVx[Q.(x) —>P(x)]](M) (T) 
Jay watched the students’ bobbing heads, mouthing as they 
transcribed, diligently counting the brackets. 
57 


PAGE 66:
Aifric Campbell 
XQ[XP Vx [Q. (x) -* P (x)]](M)(T) 
The chalk broke on the board and clattered to the floor at 
Robert’s feet. The girl in front of Jay shook her head. Robert 
tapped a finger on the lectern and Jay could sense his brother’s 
waning enthusiasm. His gaze travelled over the audience in 
barely concealed frustration. ‘My God, this is even worse than I 
thought. We are all wasting our time,’ and he grabbed his jacket 
and strode from the theatre. 
Now, almost thirty years later, Jay could acknowledge that 
although Robert had been spectacularly misguided in his 
efforts to try and persuade Jay to abandon psychoanalysis, he 
58 


PAGE 67:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
had accurately predicted where' the public love affair with 
introspection would lead. Despite the lack of hard evidence 
demonstrating its benefits, the masses had been seduced into 
believing that the talking cure was the key to a better life. 
Clients flocked to therapists when they could have gone for a 
jog, read a book, phoned a friend or taken refuge in the confes¬ 
sional where the priest's hands fiddled under the folds of his 
soutane as he battled against a purgatory of deprivation, 
inhaling the sweet scent of face powder and cheap perfume, 
reminders of all he had sacrificed in the craven service of the 
Lord: the touch of another skin; the bleak house; the lonely 
sperm. Of course. Jay reflected, priests have the power of 
absolution and what a consolation that must be. Playing God: 
now there’s a career choice. Like the SS ‘Schreibtischtater’, the 
desk murderers, pens poised over a list of names. 
But God, of course, demanded a sacrifice in return for 
eternal salvation: prayer, selflessness, a life spent turning the 
other cheek. An analyst simply demanded the gift of speech, of 
memory as a panacea against the void. 
Even after all this time, it still bothered Jay that Robert had 
completely misunderstood the thrust of psychoanalysis. What 
he saw were the headlines, the pseudo-science, the quackery, 
he was always so impatient with inexactness. You could hear it 
in his choice of music, his preference for Bach, all mathematical 
structure and precision. ‘You can feel your brain expanding 
when you play a three-part invention,’ he used to say, running a 
trilling finger over the top octaves of the over-strung piano that 
crowded the living-room corner at North Beverly Drive. 
But perhaps, given time, Robert might have come to 
understand that the brothers were in fact united by a fascina¬ 
tion with the mysteries of language, that Jay too was grappling 
with meaning and truth. He liked to imagine the kind of 
conversation they could have had if Robert had lived, sitting on 
59 


PAGE 68:
Aifric Campbell 
studio chairs in the backyard, a sharp evening wind rippling the 
alder, the little cones clinging onto the branches long after the 
leaves had fallen. 
‘The patient loses their own language,’ Jay would explain, 
‘and then I give them a better one.' He would describe for his 
brother how clients streamed through his door with their 
emptiness, their non-sense, dragged down and submerged by 
the weight of their own semantics, like cold reeds coiled tightly 
around their ankles. It was a grip that could only be released by 
a new interpretation, where the meaning of a word is altered 
and the context redefined. For language shapes and defines our 
experience. Jay saw the evidence daily: ‘Mother’, he would say 
to a client and this single word could be enough to trigger a life 
story, a whole spectrum of individual resonance and response. 
This was the real business of therapy, he thought, as he watched 
the struggles played out in his safe space, it was a great battle 
to adjust the semantics, trying not to get bruised, beaten and 
defeated by a simple word. 
Of course, Robert might have dismissed this with a restless 
wave of his hand as the night gathered in and the alder’s lichen 
glowed silver in the moonlight. Then Jay might lean forward in 
his chair to explain that the clinical practice of psychoanalysis is 
based on the premise that the telling of a story is useful, that 
the act of telling is a therapy, that the patient is healed by the 
soothing repetition of a ghosted narrative that is forever 
evolving. ‘Analyst and patient collude to create a therapeutic 
fiction - the recovered, reinvented past,’ he would say. ‘It is the 
collaboration that produces the meaning, a provisional truth, a 
working title, the continually unfolding story of why they have 
arrived in the safe space.’ 
‘So what’s the difference between a case history and a 
novel?’ Robert would ask and Jay might even have managed to 
ignore his brother’s disdain and outline his grand plan to 
60 


PAGE 69:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
integrate science and art, to take his case histories - the fusion 
of fact and fiction, the collective struggles for meaning that 
were played out daily on his couch - and transform them into 
works of literature. In retrospect, however, he wasn’t sure if he 
would ever have trusted Robert with the electric burden of this 
intimacy, knowing as he did how systematically his brother 
would annihilate any idea that could be logically persuaded of 
its own defeat. And how afterwards, when he saw the damage 
done by his carelessness, he would lock Jay in a conciliatory 
embrace as if the envelope of his affection could compensate for 
the trampling rampage through his younger brother’s dreams. 
But these were like the lost conversations that his clients have 
with the dead and the abandoned, words cast over barren seas. 
‘So the patient tells you a story. And how is that going to 
help him?' 
‘ “The act of remembering is to be planning a future.” ’ 
‘Who said that?’ 
‘Lacan,’ Jay would reply in nervous and accurate anticipation 
of Robert’s howling laughter. 
61 


PAGE 70:
• SEVEN • 
\ 
‘Jay Hamilton, I presume,’ said a voice above his head. 
Dana Flynn was instantly recognisable from the publicity 
shot on the back of The Enigma, although Jay noticed as he stood 
up to greet her that an overexposure had succeeded in editing 
out the scattering of freckles along the ridge of her nose. 
‘You are so like Robert,’ she said, her hand lingering in his 
while she inspected his face and it struck Jay as oddly imperti¬ 
nent that she was already on first name terms with his brother. 
‘Except you seem more—’ 
‘Substantial,’ he proposed. ‘My brother was a good deal 
shorter. And of course there’s the hairline.’ 
Despite a certain tiredness about the pale stretch of skin 
under her eyes, the overall impression was of a youthfulness 
that the camera had somehow substituted with serenity. Not an 
easy subject to photograph, he’d concluded when he examined 
her book, for although the author’s stare met the lens head-on, 
there was a tension in her lips that smacked of a perceptible 
discomfort. Her sleek dark hair was swept professionally off her 
shoulder and there was the blurred suggestion of a cafe awning 
overhead. Perhaps it was the lighting that created a subtle 
duality of mood, the sense of a woman struggling to get 
acquainted with a recent transformation, the glint of a diamond 
in her right lobe, the dark V of her sweater plunging into the 
fold of her arms. He wondered if the stylist had pleaded for 
abandon, tried to persuade Dr Flynn to spread her slim arms in 
62 


PAGE 71:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
a wide-armed welcome to the reader, pout those voluptuous 
lips and expose her decolletage in all its glory. 
She sat down, placing an overstuffed black satchel on the 
ground by her feet and launched unbidden into an energetic 
account of her research in a strong and confident voice, a 
lecturing frequency that was not without appeal. Unexpectedly 
slender, almost delicate in proportion, Dana Flynn wore a thin 
black-knit sweater whose cuffs were fringed with tiny grey 
beads that suggested a small concession to eveningwear. She 
crossed a leg and the contour of her kneecap was visible 
through the silky folds of her skirt - long and, he thought, 
vaguely unseasonal. Reaching down to the satchel she pulled 
out a clear plastic envelope with a large white sticker on the 
flap inscribed, ROBERT MERRITT HAMILTON: 1930-71. The 
file bulged with documents of different sizes and Jay realised 
with a jolt that this was already a project with depth and 
breadth, with tentacles that delved into the sealed passage of 
his past and he could feel the accumulated silence of the long 
years since he had spoken of his dead brother to anyone. 
‘I was particularly interested,' she was saying, ‘in the 
scientists and philosophers who migrated from Europe to the 
US before World War Two. People like Rudolf Carnap, Otto 
Neurath, Kurt Godel, Philip Frank. You’re familiar with the 
Vienna Circle? The Wiener Kreis?’ He nodded, smiling at this 
American insistence on advertising the most elementary 
linguistic competence. 
‘I guess Vienna must be an essential pilgrimage for a 
psychoanalyst? You see I did my research on you too,’ she said 
turning to the waiter who stood patiently by her chair. 
‘Indeed,’ Jay conceded and it was true, he recognised the 
desire to see where things started, a fascination with the 
relationship between event and place, as if the magic of 
invention might be contagious. What can be said at all, can be said 
63 


PAGE 72:
Aifric Campbell 
dearly, the Vienna Circle had declared in their manifesto and Jay 
recalled the opulent romance of the city, imagined the cafe 
philosophers gathered under the glint of chandeliers, the 
delectable sugar mice in the windows, the pirouetting 
Lipizzaner, the mellifluous strain of an elegant waltz, Freud and 
his hysterical women in the days before it all turned sour, 
before the accelerating quickstep of jack boots silenced the 
strings and history’s door slammed shut behind the lucky few 
who just managed to escape into the safe and eager arms of 
America. 
‘Many of the Vienna Circle ended up at the top universi¬ 
ties,’ she continued, settling back in her chair, ‘and were very 
influential in shaping the future of philosophical thought in 
America. In the last few months I’ve been digging around in the 
archives at Berkeley and that was how I came across Robert. I 
have to admit that I'd never heard of your brother until I came 
across his correspondence with a Polish logician—’ 
‘Alfred Tarski,' said Jay. ‘Robert was his star pupil.' 
In October 1956 Jay had stood on the eucalyptus hills above 
Berkeley while Robert waved a proprietorial arm across the 
view of his alma mater. A sun flash caught the face of his watch 
as he hunkered down and scribbled pu on a scrap of paper torn 
from the little Moleskine notebook that he always carried with 
him. ‘Summer 1940, right here,’ he said, thrusting the paper 
into Jay’s eight-year-old palm. ‘Seaborg, Kennedy and Wahl 
identified element 94: plutonium. The beginning of the bomb.' 
He reeled off a list of Berkeley’s Nobel Laureates as they walked 
down towards the Campanile, through slow streams of 
returning students, past a dull green knot of olive trees. They 
stopped underneath the fall yellow of a gingko and Jay felt the 
folded paper glow warm and secret in his pocket. ‘This is where 
you’ll come when it’s your turn,' said Robert, ruffling his 
shaved head. But when Jay returned as a Psychology major in 
64 


PAGE 73:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
1966, Berkeley was a haze of tear gas and truncheons, a brash 
centre of dissent for bright-eyed students who were busy 
putting the campus on the protest map. It was, however, just a 
stepping stone to his real vocation; he wasn't interested in 
taking on Governor Reagan and the National Guard, he had no 
time for the distractions and irrelevancies of politics. Jay was 
simply filling in time, as the San Francisco School of 
Psychoanalysis wouldn’t admit him at eighteen. 
‘Berkeley is overrated,’ he had announced at the end of his 
freshman year and Robert immediately sprang to its defence, 
jabbing his finger at the wheel as they bumped along the Santa 
Monica freeway. Wind sucked humidity into the car and Jay slid 
down in the passenger seat, turning his head to a window view 
of passing traffic. But it was true, he reflected, Berkeley had 
been an enormous disappointment. White-coated psychology 
lecturers pointed to caged rodents scuttling about in the 
sawdust and told their students that knowledge is only gained 
empirically. It seemed to Jay that the entire discipline was 
blundering about in the mysteries of nature. The big universal 
questions that might be answered by observing lab rat 
responses became very, very small, buried under the dry crunch 
of statistical method, the sum of all the things we do not know. 
There was no science at all to the study of humanity, he 
concluded, the white coats were only there to make them all 
feel scientific. There was no blood and guts in a psych lab, no 
/ 
bubbling potions, nothing happening at all, except counting 
and collating, checking the standard deviation and analysing 
the results. They were drowning in the tedious rigour of 
quantitative method, trying to find a way to organise the chaos. 
It was the same old dream, just like Dana’s dead heroes in their 
slavish devotion to observables. 
Jay had managed to relieve the monotony of his studies by 
embarking on a course of structured reading, spinning 
65 


PAGE 74:
Aifric Campbell 
outwards from the freshman curriculum in a cross-disciplinary 
trawl that merely confirmed his suspicions about the paucity of 
human understanding. And he kept himself busy making his 
V 
own personal psychological discoveries. For example, one 
February morning, he opened Primo Levi’s account of 
Auschwitz over breakfast and found that he could stare into a 
mass grave with his milk-dripping spoon hovering by the side 
of the page, crunching the half-soaked cornflakes as he studied 
the twisted corpses. He spent two side-tracked months 
studying Holocaust testimonials and was reassured to learn 
that he could read survivor accounts with the cold clear eye of 
observance, for he felt that this would definitely be a strength 
in his future line of business. He turned the pages, mulling over 
the compulsion to tell, as if the act of telling might prevent 
reoccurrence, like a charm to ward off evil. There are no words, 
they whispered, but the gas didn’t kill a good story, the hasty 
massacre of camp survivors didn’t eliminate the plot. In quiet 
spring dawns, when the campus grass was thick with dew. Jay 
would lift his head from the page and think about the juxtapo¬ 
sition of desensitisation and the need to bear witness. He 
thought about Levi’s book and wondered if the act of writing 
had devalued the experiment, if the successful articulation of 
horror had a diminishing return, for if language can capture the 
vividness of evil, does it also dilute the event? If you can put a 
structure on the chaos and make sense of the senseless, might 
this have a softening effect? And where, he asked, was the line 
between understanding and acceptance? Does understanding 
imply forgiveness? In Hebrew, he discovered, there was no 
word for forgiveness. Atonement was altogether a different 
concept. 
Years later Jay was reminded of this at a conference in 
Jerusalem when he took the opportunity to spend an afternoon 
at Yad Vashem and lingered for an hour in the candlelit tunnel, 
66 


PAGE 75:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
where the photos of dead children gazed out at him against an 
echoing taped recitation of 1.5 million names. Standing in the 
underground darkness, he smelt Naomi’s perfume before he 
heard her sobbing. ‘Get me out of here,’ she shrieked so he led 
her up for air and they sat in the squat shade of a yew. Naomi 
had found her grandfather in the Hall of Names, after a 
painstaking search through the Pages of Testimony. She was 
here on a self-appointed mission for her dead father, who had 
lived out his whole life as the guilty child, swaddled in the 
bitter belief that his survival was somehow to blame. Jay patted 
Naomi's hand, her sniffs subsiding into his handkerchief. ‘They 
died so that we could know their stories,’ she said and although 
Jay wanted to point out the fallacy of this statement, he decided 
against it. She seemed keen to retire to the comfort of his room 
at the Hyatt in East Jerusalem and as they made the slow ascent 
in the Sabbath elevator, Jay considered her soft moustache 
under the unforgiving fluorescent and hoped that he wouldn’t 
be too disappointed, for Naomi was undoubtedly very hirsute 
in that pale-skinned way that is typical of so many dark-haired 
women. 
In April 1970, he attended his last lecture at Berkeley. High 
up in the back of the theatre the air smelled of stale laundry and 
the drooping heads below him struggled to stay awake. Jay ran 
a hand along Skinner’s cracked spine and concluded that the 
language of science failed. The truth was that creative writers 
were more qualified to explain humanity than psychiatrists and 
philosophers. This was what Levi the chemist had eventually 
realised, that he would have to resort to fiction and poetry to 
communicate the horror of Auschwitz. The psychologists and 
psychoanalysts who had staked out their territorial claim knew 
no more than the great novelists. On his last day at Berkeley, 
Jay packed up all his textbooks and left them in three boxes on 
the sidewalk. As he sat there waiting for his ride he decided to 
67 


PAGE 76:
Aifric Campbell 
permanently dispense with the business of reading. He would 
find his stories and write the books he wanted to read. And he 
would bear his brother’s scorn. 
‘Did Robert ever mention,’ Dana’s voice returned to him, ‘that 
Tarski was on a visit to Harvard the day Hitler invaded Poland? 
He was persuaded to stay but he couldn’t get his wife and 
children out until after the war. He lost his parents and his 
brother in the camps.' 
‘“The drowned and the saved”,’ Jay murmured but Dana 
didn’t recognise the quote or chose to ignore it. ‘I mean the 
irony of the symmetry,’ he added. ‘The clever get saved, the 
ordinary get gassed. Arbitrary selection.’ 
‘Yes, I have wondered about how that must have felt.’ 
‘So your book is about survivor guilt?’ he asked. ‘And 
America’s shame? The great minds they rescued versus the 
ones they didn’t save? You want to know about guilt? Or you 
want to apportion the blame?’ 
He was a little disappointed at her lack of originality. Dana 
had the air of a tomb raider who arrives after the spoils have 
been looted, picking over the remains, searching for something 
hidden or overlooked in the carnage. And diligence was no 
substitute for flair. ‘This is a well-travelled road, of course,’ he 
said. 
‘You’re asking what I bring to the table?’ 
‘A certain naivety, perhaps?’ he said, unable to resist 
pressing the insult home. Dana took the slur, looking away to 
hide her annoyance. ‘Please don’t be offended. A different 
version of the same story can often be very enlightening. It 
depends on whether you believe the story-telling is of value in 
itself or whether you expect us to draw conclusions.' He 
noticed that her freckles had disappeared again, it was a trick of 
68 


PAGE 77:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
the light and not just the photographer’s whim. ‘But we 
digress. You were going to tell me about your interest in 
Robert?’ 
‘He is fascinating,’ she replied tersely. 
‘And of course he died unfairly young. Perhaps it is life’s 
unfairness you’re researching as well as guilt. Perhaps it has 
some personal resonance?’ 
‘No, actually,’ she snapped and Jay felt the thrill of striking 
rock. He guessed how she had been spending her days, 
wondering what it felt like to be Carnap or Tarski, to be Chosen 
when the others were condemned. What did they feel for all 
those left behind, the lesser mortals, the smaller brains? Was 
there a shadow of guilt on their shoulders as they yielded to 
America’s embrace? He could see her rooting around in the 
library in whispered communion with some zealous archivist, 
Turing’s curious phantom peering over her shoulder as she 
searched for the intrigue in strange and vibrant lives, trying to 
keep her mind off whatever it was that she was avoiding - real 
life or some approximate version that meant she often 
preferred the dead to the living. He imagined her drifting off in 
the arms of these corpses and the romance of their diaspora, 
hunched over the roll call of intellectuals who fled when reason 
left the country and abandoned it to a moral vacuum, a fertile 
yielding ground for submission and complicity. The thinkers 
were gone, the books burnt, Vienna was an empty dance hall, 
even the horses had headed for the hills. He thought of the 
ghosts who nudged at her biographer’s elbow, all that spectral 
shuffling for the prime slot, how patiently Dana listened to 
their stories, how she ranked them into a ruthless pecking 
order as they struggled against the tyranny of her priorities. 
Godel, who chose not to eat in the end, slowly starving himself 
to death in his Princeton chair forty-five years after evading the 
ovens; Schlick, shot in the chest on the University steps by a 
69 


PAGE 78:
Aifric Campbell 
disgruntled student; Levi, who hurled himself down the stairs 
to smash his screaming skull on the marble floor, and all the 
others who died with their unfinished equations and formulae 
in their hands: Carnap, Frank, even Einstein, their reckless 
optimism that the brilliance will keep on shining, leaving their 
mark in the hands of a clock, the tick of a bomb. 
Dana inclined her head as if listening to a distant call. The 
conversation had taken a sharper turn than expected and she 
was, he suspected, considering whether to engage in 
sidetracking debate. She reached for her glass, a fine silver chain 
sliding forward on her wrist. He would have to cajole her back. 
‘I read your Turing,’ said Jay, balancing his elbows on the 
arms of his chair. ‘It was a very well-researched work.' She 
nodded, accepting the compliment with a polite smile. ‘I can 
imagine it must have been very difficult to break free after so 
many years with one man. And of course, the completion of a 
book is also a loss. A bereavement even. This takes time to 
assimilate and work its way out.’ 
‘When I finished with Turing,’ she admitted, ‘it felt like I 
had exhumed and re-buried him. Sometimes it felt like a 
violation, more than prurience.’ 
‘Preying on the inarticulate, the vulnerable dead?’ 
‘I worried about dignity, the ethics of it all.’ 
‘I have often wondered if biographers fall in love with their 
subjects.’ 
‘Or analysts with their patients,' Dana replied. It was a 
triumphant point score and he saw that she was taking him on, 
it made her feel thrillingly brave to confront his paternalistic 
superiority, his underhand attempts to disrobe her soul. 
‘Actually I saw Tarski once,’ he said. ‘In 1963, it must have 
been, Robert dragged me along to a Charter Day lecture at 
Berkeley where Tarski was being honoured for his contribution 
to mathematical logic. I was only fifteen but I do remember his 
70 


PAGE 79:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
speech. He said the creative work of maths was not much 
different to the creative work of art, which is not at all the 
boring thing that people might think. He said—' 
‘That you can build a machine which will produce all possible 
truths in a given domain,’ she interrupted. ‘But unfortunately it 
is possible for some statements to be true and not true at the 
same time.’ 
Jay considered her crowd-pleasing smile, saw a little girl in 
plaits and pinafore elbowing her way to the front of the class. 
‘Tarski was talking about antinomies,’ she said. ‘Contradictory 
statements that can be given a precise definition within a 
formal or mathematical language.’ 
‘Yes, I had grasped that much.’ 
‘Oh I’m sorry,’ she smiled. ‘I know I have this awful habit of—’ 
‘Finishing other people’s sentences,’ he said as she swept 
back her hair so the pale skin of her angled neck was visible all 
the way from the jaw line to the ridged dip by her collarbone 
where the light pooled in dark shadow. Jay could imagine his 
hand tracing the curve of her shoulder, how the light thread of 
her sweater would slide easily away to reveal the coquettish¬ 
ness that might be buried under the weight of her library years. 
Dana Flynn, he decided, would require a multi-layered 
seduction and plenty of assurance that the partnering intellect 
would be up to the fuck. She was wary of too much politeness 
and didn’t see the thrill in a level playing field. She had no 
/ 
particular affinity for younger men, the sex never compensated 
for the horror of waking up to find that there never was a 
conversation to peter out. 
‘Dana,’ said Jay, leaning forward in his chair as the waiter 
appeared by his side, ‘that’s a very bulky file. If we’re going to 
carry on talking, we must eat. Would you like to have dinner 
with me?’ 
There was a hushed time delay and it seemed to Jay that the 
71 


PAGE 80:
Aifric Campbell 
waiter tensed empathically as he hovered on the brink of 
rejection. Dana looked across at Jay and then down at her 
hands, she was probing their intimacy in the way that women 
circumnavigate the shiny hard edges of the male, searching for 
the soft underbelly, some evidence that they are worth the 
emotional risk. 
‘Let’s go,’ she said, and the waiter beamed his relief. Jay 
waved him away with a note. 
‘You know,’ she said, reaching for her satchel, ‘it’s been 
difficult in the past, interviewing people who have lost relatives 
in tragic circumstances. There is always the sense of voyeurism. 
And with Robert, there is an overwhelming poignancy.’ 
‘Unfinished work. What might have been. And so you are 
anxious now. You are worried about picking over a family 
tragedy for me.’ 
She nodded, wrapping her coat around her body. 
‘You’re forgetting that storytelling is very often therapeutic,’ 
he said, ‘that the teller is in any case acting out their grief every 
day in many ways. But I mean it most sincerely when I tell you 
I’m very happy that Robert is getting some attention. I’ve 
always felt he deserved more. So you must ask me whatever it 
is you want to know.’ 
She looked up at him with a frank stare, lips parted as if she 
was about to speak and then she hesitated, shifted her gaze 
over his shoulder, looking beyond him into some private view. 
‘It is thirty years since Robert was murdered,' said Jay, ‘and I 
have thought about him every day since. You mustn’t worry 
about me. I have come to terms with my loss.' 
72 


PAGE 81:
• EIGHT • 
‘Do you ever miss America?’ asked Dana as they stepped out 
into the night, crossed Wilton Place and turned left onto 
Knightsbridge. Jay glanced across the street, strangely 
overwhelmed by the scale of her question and an urgent 
impulse to invent a longing for a some home-grown trivia, to 
admit that in sleep he still roamed the childhood deltas of the 
San Joaquin Valley, the waterways’ promise of coastline re¬ 
imagined now in his dreams as some Californian Eden, bathed 
in the soft focus of an emigrant nostalgia. 
‘No,’ he said, moving on westwards, for anything he could 
mention would be cancelled out by an over-representation of 
the things he despised: the impractibility of giant redwoods, 
the deep-harboured ugliness of Stockton, its lowlands decay. 
When he had finally left California, the stifling weight of 
climate and event slid from his shoulders and it felt like he 
could breathe for the very first time. 
Dana stopped to grimace at Harvey Nichols’ window where 
a pair of life-size angels sat on silver swings above fishbowl 
clouds, swirls of stars fluttering to rest in their hair. ‘I always 
hated Christmas displays, even when I was little,’ she said, and 
Jay was reminded of how casually women fling out invitations 
to the closed world of their childhood, the private memorabilia 
they scatter about like litter into the lives of those they wish to 
admire them, forgetting that it is the here and now that seduces 
and not the slack open mouth of the sleeping child they once 
73 


PAGE 82:
Aifric Campbell 
were, a dreamy perfection in the virgin skin. But he did not 
respond, careful not to look as if he might be leaping into 
interpretation and analysis. 
A sudden gust blew open her coat and it bfushed against his 
knuckles like the smooth pelt of some fleeing animal. He had 
noticed before how the cold can push us towards a stranger and 
his hand slipped through her arm in a gesture of solidarity 
against the chill, a certain old-fashioned charm that is never 
lost on a woman. They hurried across Sloane Street, the 
movement had shifted the mood and a walk through the night 
bustle felt like a mutual adventure. They were companions on a 
journey that could lead anywhere on this rain-slicked street, the 
night was alive with possibilities, the nocturnal charm of a 
traffic light, the shocking glow of brilliant red suspended above 
their heads. Dana was telling him now how she had learnt to 
like Los Angeles, which so many East Coasters never do, a little 
anecdote about some freeway crisis, a wrong turn on I—10 
where she ran adrift in the sinister daytime quiet of Watts. 
Women have to try so much harder to be witty, thought Jay, 
steering them gently to one side to avoid an elegant threesome 
whose long-legged stride was clearing a path through the 
oncoming pedestrians. 
A short trip had persuaded Dana to stay on for six weeks in 
the leafy security of Westwood, a five-minute walk to the 
Charles E. Young Special Collections library at UCLA where 
she had begun to examine Robert’s archives. Jay imagined her 
shuttling between the Reading Room, the North campus cafe 
and a dark wood banquette at Jerry’s deli on Weyburn where 
she ended her nights paralysed by a giant laminated menu of 
breads - pumpernickel, sourdough, rye, chala, baguette, bagels, 
Kaiser - slashing a red pen through the day’s notes under the 
overhead blur of a muted hockey game. She had also, she said, 
developed an unexpected interest in jogging which started one 


PAGE 83:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
October morning when a lap round the perimeter slopes of the 
campus prompted her to run a three-mile circuit and she 
seemed to have difficulty stopping, so she expanded her 
territory westwards to the coast. He could picture her in 
amongst the flooding community of joggers who streamed up 
from the pier along the cliff top promenade at Santa Monica in 
the early evening, past the sleeping humps of homeless buried 
under mounds of plastic bags, past out-of-season tourists who 
sat in the lotus position in the brown-grassed shade of clumpy 
palm trees, turning the pages of their guidebooks. Dana kept on 
running, because something seemed to happen after exactly 
nineteen minutes, a rhythmic pull of her body that sucked her 
consciousness inwards so that she stopped noticing anything, 
just the pounding in her ears and the punishing jerk of joints 
slapping against the tarmac. He saw her standing sideways in 
the mirror, looking at her shrinking nakedness. She was getting 
faster, lighter, more insubstantial. In sleep her legs twitched 
beneath the restless sheet and he wondered if she had thought 
of running as a metaphor, about the depths that were eluding 
her. Jay had the distinct sense she might even be dreaming 
about Robert, but that he vanished on awakening, leaving her 
bleary and bereft in the pre-dawn. 
‘Yuck/ said Dana, coming to a halt outside the crammed 
opulence of Harrods’ windows where a lone reindeer negoti¬ 
ated his mechanical revolutions through a glittering landscape 
of snow. The tremulous ‘Silent Night’ of a boy soprano escaped 
from a speaker hidden under the awning above their heads. A 
portly Santa sat on his sleigh, his whiskered lips frozen in a 
scarlet leer, his bulging frame leaning over a fleet of tethered 
huskies whose paws were frozen above ground in an 
impossible leap. Jay watched the whirling flakes settle on their 
silvery fur and remembered Christmas Eve 1954 and the dull 
grey coat of a mongrel bitch that Robert had found tucked 
75 


PAGE 84:
Aifric Campbell 
under the wheel of his parked car on Acacia and Center. ‘Look 
at this Jay,’ he’d cried as he carried her into the house wrapped 
in his tan jacket and together they fashioned a manger of 
blanket underneath the Christmas tree. Jay crouched over her 
trembling form counting her ribs with a tentative finger while 
the bitch’s faint growl subsided into an agonised refusal of a 
bowl of milk. His mother rested a hand on Robert’s shoulder. ‘I 
can’t take her back to college, Mom,’ and he looked over at Jay. 
‘You’ll have to be my Pet Man, look after her for me,’ and so he 
entrusted to his kid brother the burden of a responsibility that 
a six-year-old certainly needed, something to love and care for, 
something to nurture and cherish. ‘I'll call her Lassie,’ said Jay, 
combing his fingers through the matted clumps. All night long 
he lay on the floor beside her, exploring a new sensation of 
heartache that seemed to radiate beneath his pyjamas while the 
little grey bitch jerked and quivered in a fitful sleep. He drifted 
off, dreaming of a future where Lassie skittered after a ball on 
the sidewalk along Woodward, where his mother sat smiling 
down from the red kitchen stool as he taught Lassie how to beg 
on her hind legs. He slept long and deep until a ghastly rattle 
shattered the dawn and Jay awoke to find the dog curled in a 
cold crescent of death. 
His scream brought them into the living room. ‘I guess her 
heart gave out,’ said Robert, lifting the frail corpse. Jay stood in 
the middle of the room, his chest pounding with rage at his 
brother for thrusting into his life something that could be 
ripped so cruelly from him, the intolerable pain of loving and 
losing and he fled to the bathroom to insulate his dignity from 
any sympathy. Lying balled on the floor with his cheek pressed 
against the linoleum, he thought of the lost future where 
Robert would come home for weekends and marvel at Lassie’s 
tricks. His mother rapped on the door, her wheedling tone 
quickly escalating to unapologetic threat. ‘You open that door 


PAGE 85:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
right now. Jay Hamilton, otherwise...' ’ Robert appealed to his 
rational side. ‘She would have died soon anyway Jay-and you 
can always get another pet. It would have been much worse if 
you’d had her for years.’ But Jay needed the bathroom to 
contain his distress, his skin was raw, he felt as if his chest had 
been wrenched open and exposed to an icy reality, a head¬ 
battering fury that ended with a sideways whack on the edge of 
the iron bath. He lost consciousness for a moment but came 
round to hear the gush of the kitchen tap and his brother’s 
humming in the bedroom next door, the wall so thin Jay could 
have punched right through it. When Robert’s car backed away 
for chapel he sat on the floor blinking at the tears and a little 
blood that trickled from the cut above his eye where the corner 
had struck the bath, rocking back and forth as if the reassuring 
motion could put some safe distance between him and the dead 
dog and a heartbreak that couldn’t be borne. 
‘So why is this not an enchanting scene?’ said Dana, hauling 
him back to the Christmas present where the soprano lingered 
on an extended final note. 
‘Perhaps,’Jay replied, ‘because alongside the real memory of 
our childhoods, there is a parallel image which is a corrective 
version of the real thing. An idealised Christmas. As if to say: 
this is what we should really have had, this is what Christmas 
should really have been like. But the reality always fell short 
and this,’ he gestured at the window, ‘therefore appears like a 
desperate parodying of our fantasies.’ 
‘So what would an analyst suggest?’ 
‘That for you, reality has been disappointing.’ 
‘Then he’d be wrong.’ 
‘I guess that’s what happens when you ask a psychoanalyst a 
simple question,’ he smiled. 
In younger years or different circumstances, or maybe with 
another woman, Jay might have taken her in his arms right 
77 


PAGE 86:
Aifric Campbell 
there but he could not be sure of Dana’s response and 
awkwardness appalled him as much as unwarranted rejection. 
‘We are almost there,’ he said, touching her elbow. But she 
pulled forward, setting a brisk pace and Jdy knew he had 
unsettled her with his card-trick analysis. 
‘You know I visited your old house in Stockton,’ she said 
without breaking her stride or even turning her head and the 
sudden impertinent mention of Jay’s hometown felt like a 
towel ripped from his body. 
‘Not the California everyone dreams of,’ he said, struggling 
to shake off a ludicrous sense of personal violation. 
‘I guess it must have been a pretty bleak place to live,’ she 
nodded into her collar, as if this thought had just occurred to 
her, although she could not have failed to notice the air of 
irretrievable decline that hung over the single-storey sprawl of 
squat brick houses in this hope town that was once a stopping 
post en route to Sacramento. Streams of would-be miners had 
passed through on their way to the gold country only to wind 
up sleeping on the bare earth, lapping at infected water until 
their dreams expired in the black mines and they returned 
months later, collapsed exhausted in Stockton. The town 
sagged under the weight of so much disappointment and the 
miners reinvented themselves as stevedores along the sixty 
miles of deep-water channel, where freighters ferried cargoes of 
agricultural produce to San Francisco and millions of tons of 
iron ore from Utah and Nevada began their long ocean passage 
all the way to Japan. 
To inspire a nobler civic life, was the grand inscription above 
the columns of Stockton City Hall, but this didn't fool Jay as he 
sat in fourth grade, watching the listless flutter of the Stars and 
Stripes through the classroom window. ‘Captain Charles M. 
78 


PAGE 87:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
Weber,' said Miss Purdy tapping her ruler on the black-and- 
white photo of a podgy slit-lipped man with a waxed beard and 
indignant eyes. ‘In 1850, he named our town after Commodore 
Robert Field Stockton whom he met during the Mexican war.’ 
The children blinked and waited for the punchline, a story that 
would flesh out the man, some evidence of heroism perhaps, 
that the naming of their town was significant or at least 
evocative. But Miss Purdy had nothing to add, for the story 
ended at the beginning. Commodore Stockton didn’t die in 
glorious battle or even gain notoriety, in fact he never even 
came to visit. Jay felt the chill of an inauspicious beginning, his 
hometown was a metaphor for failure, the odds were stacked 
against him in these badlands of disappointment. As if to 
underscore his suspicions, Miss Purdy concluded her lesson 
with a summary of the town’s historical landmarks, which were 
nothing worth talking about, a handful of aspirational Victorian 
buildings - the courthouse cupola and the State Hospital for 
the Insane, built on a hundred-acre site donated free of charge 
by Captain Weber, so desperate had he become to secure some 
recognition for Stockton. For Jay, scratching his initials into the 
softwood of his school desk, there was no former glory and 
nothing to learn except the fastest route out of there. 
The years slipped away, it was 1955 again and Jay was 
staring through the screen door on Woodward at one of the 
local buzz-cut boys with short crisp sleeves and scrubbed 
fingernails who appeared occasionally on the front stoop and 
asked polite permission from his mother for Jay to come and 
play. He trailed the boy out onto the street although he knew 
that this one, like all the other neighbourhood kids, had 
nothing to show, for Jay out-ran, out-shot, out-smarted all of 
them, they had nothing to give him, all they could offer was 
their mediocre friendship, their thrifty apple-pie moms and 
horn-rimmed dads. He preferred the thrill of his own company, 
79 


PAGE 88:
Aifric Campbell 
going solo on a thorough exploration of his environment, 
pushing further and further afield on his bike, searching for 
something to feel, somewhere out there in the San Joaquin 
basin, a bone-dry valley that had been transformed by an 
ambitious system of aqueducts in the 1940s so that what was 
once a vast hopeless plain became the biggest fruit and 
vegetable farm in the world. The whisper of work spread out 
across the state and beyond, Greyhounds bussed in cheap 
labour in straw hats who filled huge sacks with onions, carrots, 
apples and pears for 20 cents a time, mopped their sweat- 
soaked handkerchiefs under the splintering heat of the midday 
sun, dragged their weary feet towards the dust-belching roar of 
the returning bus and slumped into a dead sleep, all their hopes 
and dreams bound by the Sierra Nevada and the white surf of 
the Pacific. 
On late spring afternoons Jay used to cycle down to the 
waterways where slow dredgers ploughed straight cuts through 
the tired old riverbanks for huge vessels that couldn’t handle 
the bends. He stopped to stare across the water at the Stephens 
Brothers Shipyards where they were building minesweepers for 
the Korean War, and then pedalled on past Deadreach, Fern, 
Tule Islands to the Delta farm lands, where he crouched in a 
crop of sour-smelling milo and watched a close-range ocean 
freighter cut a majestic line through the field channel. To see 
such giant vessels so far inland was uplifting and he was 
reassured to know there were many escapes: eastwards to the 
majestic peaks of Yosemite; westwards, to the Bay sprawl of 
San Francisco and southwards on the 1-5 where long-distance 
trucks cut an efficient four hundred mile route to Los Angeles. 
In the summer of 1965 Jay stumbled on a regeneration 
project that aimed to revitalise downtown Stockton and spent a 
whole afternoon watching a band of shirtless workers paint 
geometric shapes onto the intersections of San Joaquin and 
80 


PAGE 89:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
Main Street. Two men stood underneath the Bank of Stockton 
clock looking on in amazement as a beak-like curve of blue and 
red and white materialised on the road. ‘Some kinda bird/ said 
one to the other. ‘An eagle maybe?’ Jay returned at midnight 
when the town was bereft of traffic to inspect the muralled 
surface under the streetlights. Early next morning the 
workmen appeared on the corner of El Dorado where clusters 
of locals gathered to admire this brave attempt to achieve the 
impossible: to beautify Stockton, like dressing a mutant in a 
party frock, as if to advertise its shortcomings. There they 
stood, the residents of his hometown, surrounded by promise, 
by the sound of other hearts beating, a beacon of ugliness in a 
landscape of beauty: the Midwest transplanted into California’s 
backyard. 


PAGE 90:
• NINE • 
\ 
Brasserie St Quentin was discreetly upscale, a local establish¬ 
ment for quiet Knightsbridge money where the emphasis was 
on good food and excellent service. The decor was vaguely art 
nouveau with etched mirroring and dark wood. Long red 
leather banquettes ran along the outer walls and elaborate 
chandeliers cast an authentic Parisian gloom over the tables. 
Jay helped Dana with her coat, his hand slipping inside the 
silk lining to linger in its dying warmth, like the body heat of an 
inert animal. The maitresse d’ led them to a corner table at the 
rear, murmuring something about Gaston, the chef for more 
than fifteen years, who had a particular affection for his 
American patrons and whose fishing adventures were recorded 
in a photo display on the stairs that led down to the 
washrooms. Jay’s favourite was a black-and-white shot entitled, 
Fort Lauderdale, Juillet 1980, where Gaston stood grinning over a 
slumped marlin, his arm around a halter-necked blonde in 
cropped white shorts who held a nervous glass of champagne, 
one delicate sandal raised above ground to avoid the spreading 
pool of blood at her feet. 
They passed a round table in the centre of the restaurant 
where a group of middle-aged men were vying for the 
attentions of a slim brunette in a strapless black dress who was 
young enough to be their daughter. The men scraped back their 
chairs, clutching their napkins at crotch level when she stood 
up, adjusted her chiffon wrap and sauntered off to the 
82 


PAGE 91:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
bathroom, leaving a trail of admiration in her wake. Jay 
watched them sit down, flushed and jostling for position, they 
were eating red meat tonight and hang the cholesterol, the 
years were slipping away, they were feeling wonderfully rejuve¬ 
nated; they might order cognac and to hell with the 
consequences for they were twenty-five again and may even 
have a Cuban, they were in lust and invulnerable, they simply 
wanted to touch the soft melt of her throat, to hear her breathe, 
to see the backless strapless dress slip magically to the floor. 
Men, he reminded himself, don’t appreciate how fortunate they 
are that women consistently fail to get their act together. 
He ordered the St Emilion. ‘Robert’s favourite,’ he confided 
to Dana who had already secreted her notebook to the side of 
her plate and was ready to turn this dinner into a working 
session. From the satchel propped on the chair beside her, she 
withdrew a large blue file with neon-coloured page markers 
stuck to the corners and passed Jay a photocopied line drawing 
of a church. It was an invitation to a recital at the First 
Presbyterian on El Dorado and Vine on 19 July 1956, where, 
‘Robert Hamilton, Minister of Music, will be playing three 
choral preludes including “Wachet Auf”, Bach’s Preludium und 
Fuge in A moll... ’ and Jay recalled how his mother had clasped 
her hands to her aproned breast while he obediently read the 
Stockton Tribune aloud. ‘Organist Robert Hamilton guided us up 
and down the ladders, in and out of narrow passages, through 
three storeys of organ. Everywhere were pipes, nearly 4,000 of 
them, for the First Presbyterian Church has commissioned one 
of the biggest organs in the San Francisco Bay area. Square 
wooden pipes that a man could climb into, little metal ones no 
larger than a pencil. Its sixty-five ranks can imitate each section 
of a full orchestra. It boasts a total of 3,621 pipes and is built 
from six different kinds of wood - yew, oak, ebony, pear tree - ’ 
Jay had stopped, but his mother gestured impatiently, she was 
83 


PAGE 92:
Aifric Campbell 
drinking in the detail and nothing was superfluous. ‘It 
comprises a great organ (3.5’ wind) and a swell organ (5’ 
wind), a choir organ (4’ wind) a solo organ (12+20’ wind), 
pedal organ (5’ wind), a pedal organ, seven swell pistons, seven 
choir pistons, seven solo antiphonal pistons, seven pedal 
pistons, seven coupler pistons, seven master pistons, eight 
general pistons. Air supply is furnished by blowers of 5 and 10 
horsepower.' 
Robert had come down from Berkeley a week early, 
summoned by a letter from Miss Edith Dicker who had funded 
his musical education since childhood. A benefactress with an 
excess of enthusiasm for Handel that culminated in her 
$11,000 donation of the organ, she had inherited her fortune 
from her father, one of the rare successes that flourished in 
Stockton's otherwise bleak historical landscape. Mr Edward 
Dicker had pitched up from Colorado in dogged pursuit of gold 
but was saved by the pitfalls that befell most of the desperadoes 
when a combination of innate cunning and latent vision kept 
him out of the mines for long enough to realise that the future 
lay elsewhere. By the 1950s he presided over a modest empire 
of music halls that stretched from Stockton to Bakersfield, 
though this was small consolation for the loss of his beloved 
Amelia who produced a daughter but died delivering the 
placenta, a tragedy for which Miss Edith Dicker begged forgive¬ 
ness every day of her life. 
After a rehearsal at the church on the eve of his perform¬ 
ance, Robert had called round to Miss Dicker’s house, leaving 
Jay to wait in the afternoon shade of the stoop, licking a sticky 
tumbler of lemonade. A sulking cat stared him down from the 
wicker chair until he snagged its paw underneath the creaking 
rocker and it fled mewling into the shelter of a topiaried hedge. 
Behind the window, Miss Dicker sat in a Chesterfield while 
Robert delivered an impromptu piano recital, skimming 
84 


PAGE 93:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
through a medley selection at hex1 breathless request. A wasp 
sauntered into Jay's tumbler in the ponderous heat. He 
upended the glass, watched it overcome by a drowsy surfeit of 
sugar and he understood perfectly, as the insect gave up its 
struggle, that this was the kind of experiment boys needed to 
do - it was the route to invention and discovery, an examina¬ 
tion of cause and effect. Even Miss Dicker’s God had done it, 
creating the seven-day wonder of the Earth and then sending 
the floods to destroy His handiwork. 
When Robert came back out to the porch he'd forgotten that 
Jay was there at all, so lost had he been in the warmth of Miss 
Dicker’s admiration, standing in the doorway while she urged 
him to abandon his academic career for the worthy alternative 
of a permanent musical directorship at the First Presbyterian. It 
was an ambition she pursued until her death three years later, 
when, after a lifetime of squandering her father’s music hall 
money on the church, she left a will which startled the 
community by insisting on a cremation and named Robert as 
the second beneficiary (after the First Presbyterian), with the 
condition that he give up his studies at Berkeley and dedicate 
himself to the state-wide musical future of the church. But 
Robert dismissed the offer, along with the request that he 
personally scatter her ashes over the San Joaquin River, so that 
Jay - by then aged eleven - and his mother were charged with 
this responsibility and dutifully carried the urn in a blanket all 
the way along Fremont down to the deep water port, where he 
tipped the ashes into the water with a gentle splash. His 
mother held her hat against the wind and blessed herself in a 
hasty attempt to dignify the proceedings, while Jay looked 
down from the quayside into the rippled concentric and 
reflected on transience, how unreliable and alone we are in life 
even as in death. 
A week after the recital Jay had fallen ill and was burning a 
85 


PAGE 94:
Aifric Campbell 
fever when he heard the click of his mother’s heels along the 
kerb in the after-school hush. Passing an indifferent hand over 
his damp forehead, she led him to the box room where he lay 
babbling in the shade and he remembered a moment of sudden 
sobering, when he turned his head to where she sat on the edge 
of the mattress, looking not at him, but at the photo of Robert’s 
graduation on the dressing table, the exaggerated protrusion of 
his ears beneath the mortar board, the thin-lipped crease of his 
smile. She sighed, trailing a loose hand along the faded blue 
coverlet and Jay understood instantly and forever, that he was 
nothing more than an unfortunate accident and in this precise 
moment, he solved the mystery of what was wrong between 
them, why his mother often seemed startled that he was there 
at all, why he seemed invisible, why she felt no impulse to hug 
and touch him the way she did Robert, why her concentration 
drifted off in the middle of his enthusiasms. 
Fortunately, survival is instinctive at eight years old, so Jay 
didn’t waste time ruminating but learned quickly not to be a 
nuisance, for the distance between maternal indifference and 
neglect was indeed small. From then on, he took care not to be 
a burden, to be responsible and helpful, because he understood 
the precarious nature of his position, especially when the 
recently widowed Mr Donald Franklin began stopping by in 
1958, diverting his mother’s attention with flowers and 
cookies. Jay could sense the enormous risk of a man in the 
house to whom he would be just someone else’s brat, so he was 
ruthlessly attentive to his mother’s needs and never, ever the 
source of worry or complaint, none of which was particularly 
challenging for a solitary and capable youngster. Eventually, Mr 
Franklin stopped calling and Jay believed he even sensed a 
certain relief in his mother’s demeanour. He grew up acclima¬ 
tised to a great deal of independence, so busy was she between 
writing letters to Robert (first at Berkeley and then later at 
86 


PAGE 95:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
UCLA), working in the supplies store on Wheeler and 
polishing the pews at the First Presbyterian, where Jay 
suspected she sometimes shook her head at her own stupidity 
and asked the Lord how, at the age of thirty-seven, when she 
knew she was married to a good-for-nothing wastrel, she could 
have gone and gotten pregnant again. But she stood by her son 
and Jay admired her grim determination, her staying power; it 
was an early lesson in how women will stick around and do 
their duty, submit to the tyranny of children and the thankless 
demands of domestic obligation. 
By the time he was a teenager the preoccupation with his 
disjointed family had waned and Jay had become focused and 
purposeful. It had all started to fall into place one lunchtime in 
summer 1961, when he pedalled to a halt as a truck veered 
round a downtown corner and unsettled its load, spraying 
crates of tomato high and far, spattering the parked cars and the 
sidewalk with a trail of crimson splodge. A passing child 
clapped his hands and Jay, at thirteen-and-a-half, found that the 
ever-increasing circles of his exploration had finally delivered 
him to his destiny. The air was heavy with the sweet stink of 
crushed fruit on the corner of Center and Weber where winos 
sat in crumpled suits on the stoop of the Rescue Mission, 
scratching underneath the caked sweatbands of their battered 
hats and sucking on cigarette butts as they mumbled through 
stories at the Door of Hope, spitting out slivers of memory not 
yet dissolved by furtive brown-bagged sips, before slipping into 
a dribbling doze broken by the soup-bearing ladies of the 
church who prodded them into a reluctant wakefulness. For 
two whole summer months. Jay sat astride his cycle soaking up 
the store of their fragments and incoherence: tales of mangrove 
swamps and rust belt winters, the piss-soaked floors of 
countless correctional facilities, the gut-crushing thud of a 
truncheon, the loose rattle of smashed teeth in a broken jaw. 
8 7 


PAGE 96:
Aifric Campbell 
And as he listened he saw the trail of connections lost along the 
way, the mothers, brothers, sisters, wives and children whose 
names had been forgotten, obliterated by the liquor or ground 
into the dust as the thread of their lives unravelled. Time itself 
unspooled around street corners as the storytellers stumbled 
through a repertoire of emotion that swept them along on 
alternate waves of laughter and tears, finally subsiding into the 
silent contemplation of a familiar misery, punctuated by the 
memory of fleeting respites in the soft arms of transient 
women. A nodding stillness fell heavy and airless on the stoop 
of the Mission. The audience shifted on crates or shuffled by 
the doorpost, grunting and chiding, seduced by the broken 
rhythm of other lives, locked in the grip of the stories that 
petered out into the tattered wreck of the present. 
Jay noticed that the quiet ones sometimes surprised 
themselves by drifting into speech, as if they had just 
uncovered a voice long forgotten. Like Luther, with a 
permanently sealed eye and a palsied trembling in his left hand, 
his grey-black skin cracked like the hide of a prehistoric animal. 
It wasn’t clear if Luther realised he was actually speaking when 
one day he cut into a lull on the stoop and took them all to a 
field in Michigan thirty-two years earlier, where he was lying 
flat on his back in a yellow plain of maize that stretched out as 
far as you could see, watching the cloud of cigarette smoke 
hover and drift against the dazzling blue of the sky. He’d been 
charged with looking out for his little sister Maisie, who was 
playing with a stick in the dirt track that cut through the vast 
corn belt. Two-and-a-half years old in a pink and white dress 
and a ribbon in her braided hair, a little vision of loveliness 
tracing patterns in the dust. Luther could hear Maisie’s sing¬ 
song as he lay there daydreaming of Delecta, a girl with amber 
eyes and a come-on kind of smile, he could picture her sucking 
on a piece of candy across the slow rumbling bustle on 
88 


PAGE 97:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
Lafayette, leaning against the shop window on the corner 
outside Johnson’s place, like she was waiting for a rrde or 
something, she’s only twelve or thirteen, but Delecta’s already 
got everything in the right place. She takes a step forwards, 
looking like she’s going to cross the road when a pickup 
trundles past and Luther stubs out his cigarette and swallows 
hard, heart thumping, she’s so close he can smell her hair oil 
and the next thing there’s an almighty crash and tyre screech. 
Luther opens his eyes, hears a man’s wail like a cat screaming 
in the dead of night and he’s on his feet, crashing through the 
corn that slashes at his face, the fifty yards feels like miles, but 
it's too late. Little Maisie is lying there bent in broken-backed 
ugliness like a discarded doll, her dress pushed up over her 
tummy and the driver is staggering around in the dust, 
shrieking oh-god-oh-god-oh-god-oh-god. He's Johnny Fletcher, 
sixteen years old, making deliveries in his daddy’s truck and he 
swears he didn’t see Maisie, she just shot out in front of him 
like a little pink rabbit, but Luther whacks him to the ground, 
he is yelling at him to stop his wailing, he puts a hand over the 
boy’s mouth, his eyes are rolling and he’s pushing and 
scratching. Luther jumps up and kicks Johnny Fletcher hard in 
the stomach, stamps on his lolling head again and again and 
again and then he picks up a rock and would have smashed it 
into the boy’s crushed face, but as he raises his arm Luther 
hears the distant rumble of a vehicle, looks up to see an 
approaching dust cloud. He stumbles over to Maisie, reaches 
out to close her dead eyes so she won’t see Johnny Fletcher’s 
bloody face, he pulls down her dress, covers her up and starts 
running. 
They caught him before nightfall, it wasn’t difficult with the 
haphazard trail he had left cutting across roads and sneaking 
through backyards in the neighbouring town and after they’d 
cracked Luther’s rib, they slung him in the cell. Later, much 
89 


PAGE 98:
Aifric Campbell 
later, they let his daddy come in to rattle the cold bars and spit 
in his good-for-nothing face, yelling it was a good thing his son 
was locked up or he’d rip him apart with his own bare hands. 
He might as well have, for Luther raged and fought his way 
through seven years for attempted homicide in the County 
Correctional facility and then a couple of years on the outside 
where he drifted through backroom boxing rings all the way 
east to New York State, until a robbery gone wrong landed him 
in Sing Sing and a windowless cell that was three foot wide. 
Talking was not permitted and the stink from the buckets was 
so bad he could hardly breathe, so he just hollered at the walls 
until the guards came and worked him over. And each time 
Luther passed out he hoped it would be the last, that death 
would deliver him, but they always left him within an inch of 
his life so Luther could remain tormented by the shame and the 
memory of Maisie laying there like a road kill. 
The Mission men nodded in the midday silence. Luther’s 
head sagged heavy on his chest. Down below the stoop, Jay ran 
a slow finger across the baking chrome of his sunburnt handle¬ 
bars, waiting for the continuance, for some sign that Luther 
might take up the thread. ‘Oh Lordy,’ sighed a man in the 
doorpost and Miss Ellison appeared on the threshold, her 
fingers pressed tight in bony prayer. ‘The way of the 
transgressor is hard,’ she intoned and Luther shook himself, 
rose from his crate and shuffled off with a furious limp. Miss 
Ellison blessed herself with a shiny pocket crucifix and raised 
her frown out across Weber into the horizon, beyond the world 
of the lost and hopeless that sat beneath her on the stoop. 
Jay carried on listening to the stories into the fall, through 
the dry winter and late into spring nights after school, oblivious 
to the occasional taunts and offers the men flung his way. He 
maintained a stubborn silence and eventually they stopped 
noticing him at all and he faded into the background, the 
90 


PAGE 99:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
sidewalk clutter, he could arrive and disappear without 
comment. He never asked a question, for he learnt that if you 
listened long enough, you heard everything you needed to 
know. Even on the cusp of adolescence, he was already 
unusually attentive, he could hear how all the Mission tales 
merged and shifted in the telling, filtered through the unreli¬ 
able membrane of memory. He saw how the men absorbed each 
others' pasts, so that they could no longer distinguish between 
beginnings and endings, between truth and falsehood, 
ownership and possession; it was a great dissolution of privacy 
as they raided each other’s lives. He saw that the driver was the 
compulsion to tell, a desire to be anaesthetised by the narrative 
drone. They were trying to put a structure on their miserable 
chaos and there was something happening in the repetitive 
transactions between teller and listener, some kind of delicious 
comfort in this communion of souls, an absolution perhaps, or 
something universal that he did not yet comprehend. The 
Mission men furnished Jay with a permanent vision of failure, 
of those who floundered in the face of adversity, the groping 
power of the disenfranchised who have nothing to offer but 
their stories. They gave him a sense of the mean margin 
between winners and losers, the crushed backbone of the 
American Dream, the mumbling Hispanics, the negroes with 
their nicotine palms and the ones who disappeared without 
warning, shuffling off into the night to repeat their histories or 
maybe towards the mirage of a future in which they could 
transcend mistakes. 
One parched afternoon in the spring of'62, a green Cadillac 
screeched to a halt in front of the Mission and a brown-suited 
man with oiled hair stepped out and raised a felt hat, stood 
with both arms spread wide before the crowd. ‘Hey boys, 
'member me?’ he said with a broad grin. The stoop-sitters 
blinked in silence. ‘Billy Jennings,’ he prompted. ‘Billy-no-good? 
9 l 


PAGE 100:
Aifric Campbell 
Spent two years sitting on my ass on that there stoop?’ One of 
the Mission men lifted a finger and pointed at the fender that 
shimmered in the heat. That there yourn, Billy?’ and brown- 
suited Billy slapped the green bonnet. ‘Yup, she’s all mine. 
Bought and paid for,’ and the Mission man cackled, ‘Yooooooh 
Billy,’ and the others crowed and slapped their knees and Billy 
said, ‘Got meself a real job, a real girl too. Getting married in the 
fall,’ and the audience was howling and whooping and pointing 
and waving and Billy spun round on an angry heel. ‘Losers,’ he 
spat into the dust and jumped back into his car, roared round 
the corner in a barrelling cloud of exhaust and was gone. 
Later that summer Jay’s hunt for stories led him up the 
steps of Stockton Library on Saturday mornings, slipping 
behind a shelf whenever he saw Miss Purdy chatting with the 
librarian, hiding from the seal of their approval, this teenage 
boy who was reading books instead of hanging around street 
corners. He embarked on a methodical search through the 
limited resources of the fiction collection, a voracious trawl 
through Melville, Hawthorne, Wharton, James and anything 
else he could find. It seemed that these writers were trying to 
inhabit souls. It was a vast endeavour of chronicling, a meticu¬ 
lous enumeration of characteristics and responses that might 
eventually equate to the essence of a man and Jay marvelled at 
all this bewildering intensity, but he knew he was on to 
something. At the end of the summer, he sat in a sunbleached 
corner of the library and concluded that there was only one 
story and an endless variation on the theme: it was all about the 
crippling struggle for love. 
The following day as he stood at the foot of the Mission, he 
understood that, for him, the process of story-gathering was 
neither experiential nor empathic: he could unpick, he could 
see, but in the end, he still didn’t feef. He had a good nose for 
plot and could dabble without ever breaking the surface. 
92 


PAGE 101:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
Unimpeded by an excess of emotion, Jay was free to skate on 
the surface of others’ realities, peeling back the veneer with 
scalpel-like precision. He suspected even then that he could see 
more clearly than others, untroubled as he was by the 
hamstrings of emotion and so he gathered up all the stories he 
could find because he knew, in the way that we feel the first 
stirrings of a great idea, that one day he would be able to do 
something with them, although he wasn’t yet sure what that 
thing would be. 
‘How are your grades?’ asked Robert in the fall, flicking 
through Jay’s high school math on the stoop while their mother 
rocked in quiet contemplation of her sewing. It was already 
apparent that Jay had inherited nothing of his brother’s 
scientific talents and to make matters worse, his interests 
gravitated, apparently, in the wrong direction. Robert stood in 
his vest, both hands resting on the back of his mother’s cane 
chair. The birdless air was thick with the humid promise of 
night. ‘Why aren’t you taking physics and chemistry?’ he asked 
and Jay wondered if it was the rip in Robert’s shirt that made 
his mother smile, or the pleasure of touching his still-warm 
clothes. ‘A little less of this stuff would help,’ said Robert, 
pointing to the Whitman cradled in Jay’s lap. 
‘You should listen to your brother,’ said his mother. ‘He 
always came top of the class.’ She bit down on her thread and 
offered up the shirt. ‘Thanks, Mom,’ said Robert, leaning down 
to kiss her cheek. Her hand slid up to pat the lingering side of 
his jaw and in that moment, Jay could see the outline sketch of 
a family in the hour before suppertime, the bread-winner 
returning home, ruffling his son’s hair on the stoop, bending 
down to kiss his wife’s face, a low sun burning a dull orange in 
the belly of the sky on any summer evening, anywhere in 
America, in 1962. 
By the end of that year. Jay had constructed his personal 
9 3 


PAGE 102:
Aifric Campbell 
destiny: he would be both story listener and story maker, it 
would be the perfect substitute for what he apparently failed to 
feel but what left others enthralled. He would capture 
landscapes of loss. He would collect other people’s stories - his 
own seemed a paltry thing, very explainable, a natural progres¬ 
sion of mundane events, so he would net other tales like butter¬ 
flies, stretching the pressed wings to get a better view of the 
variant strains of a species, little vignettes of humanity lined up 
in a display cabinet. This was Jay’s homage to the human 
mystery that surrounded him, the best he could hope for and 
the most he could do, a sort of veneration, looking through the 
glass that separated him from others. 
94 


PAGE 103:
• TEN • 
‘Christ, I haven’t seen that since the day,’ Jay exclaimed, 
reaching across the table to grab a sheet of paper protruding 
from Dana’s file. She raised a startled head as if she doubted 
the wisdom of this move, but he had already pulled the page 
towards him. 
‘The Los Angeles Times,’ he murmured, running a finger along 
the photocopied banner. ‘Monday, March 8, 1971.’ 
‘I’m sorry,’ said Dana. ‘I didn’t mean—’ her voice almost a 
whisper as if volume could damage. 
'“UCLA professor found strangled,'” he read the headline 
aloud. ‘“A UCLA professor was found strangled in his luxury 
West LA home, apparently by three men who then stole his car 
to escape, LAPD said. Robert Hamilton, 40, a professor of logic, 
was found on the bathroom floor of his $80,000 home by his 
brother James Hamilton. Mr Hamilton said he saw two men 
drive away in his brother’s car. Police issued an apb for the 
men.”’ 
At an adjoining table a cluster of dark suits were united in a 
subdued laughter. He looked up at Dana. Her face paled, as if 
the lights had dimmed. ‘They got his age wrong by a year,’ said 
Jay. ‘And I never quite understood why in one small paragraph 
they chose to emphasise the “80,000 dollar home”. But you 
know I searched the paper for what seemed like ages until I 
finally found it right here on page 8, in the metropolitan 
section. I sat for hours with the paper on my lap, read it cover 
95 


PAGE 104:
Aifric Campbell 
to cover and over again. I can still remember every single little 
item. It was the day Captain Medina was charged with murder 
at My Lai and Nixon said: “I seriously doubt if we will ever have 
another war, Vietnam is probably the last one.” There was 
something about Norman Mailer and Harper’s - a row about an 
article on sexuality. And a thirty-one-year-old nun was 
implicated in some bizarre plot to murder Kissinger.’ Dana 
smiled. He could see she was being indulgent now, she had 
already done her research, she didn’t need Jay for any 
background colour. 
And of course the Manson trial was going on - there was a 
report from the previous day’s court testimony from a psychia¬ 
trist who said Manson was like a father figure to the three girls 
involved in the killings,’ he added. ‘There seemed a hidden 
irony in everything, even the temperature.’ 
‘I went to see it,’ she said. ‘Robert’s house I mean, at 3840 
North Beverly Drive.’ Jay stretched a flat palm on the 
tablecloth. He would have liked to slap her impudent cheek. ‘Of 
course it wasn't easy to find,’ she continued, ‘the address is 
kind of misleading seeing as North Beverly Drive becomes 
Coldwater Canyon. But I figured it out. It must have been a real 
sanctuary for him, way up there in the foothills.’ 
‘The LAPD transformed the house into a crime scene,’ said 
Jay, and lifted his glass, letting the tepid wine flood his mouth. 
‘I remember the strangest things about that morning. Like for 
example, it was 43 degrees when they arrived just after 7 am.’ 
He flexed his table hand. ‘Memory is wonderfully selective. We 
cling to the peripherals in moments of stress, little slivers of 
reality that construct a defence against the trauma.’ 
Dana inclined closer, gripping her pen and he withdrew in 
his seat, overtaken by a dyspeptic unease. It was a base and 
relentless curiosity that propelled her on from the details of 
Robert’s life to a morbid preoccupation with the circumstances 
96 


PAGE 105:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
of his death. Not yet, he thought, not yet, for he needed a 
moment, would like to stall her assault on his past, feeling 
vaguely unsettled by the black satchel that squatted on the 
chair beside her like a loyal dog. 
‘We are jumping ahead,’ he said as the waiter arrived. Dana 
opened her mouth as if to protest but had the good grace to 
stop short, she had done time with anguished relatives who 
baulked at her unseemly romp through the buried treasures of 
their past. She laid down her pen, reconciling herself to an 
obedient patience, allowing him a brief respite from the 
avalanche of sensation that she held in her files. 
‘Bon appetit,’ offered the waiter with a bow and Dana scruti¬ 
nised her lifeless sole. ‘I wanted to ask you about Robert’s 
personal papers. If he left any diaries or letters?’ 
‘Salacious details you mean?’ 
‘I just wondered—’ 
‘My mother handed over the contents of Robert’s office to 
UCLA without consulting me,’ said Jay. He remembered 
arriving at Dodd Hall a week after the murder to find a stack of 
grey card boxes in the corner of Robert’s office, the desk 
drawers open and piles of documents arranged neatly on top. A 
woman with a long brown plait knelt on the floor. ‘What—’ 
said Jay and she looked up with a.start. ‘Can I help you?’ she 
asked with a smile but he could not think what to say except to 
spread his bewildered hands. ‘I’m his brother.’ ‘Oh,’ she said, 
scrambling to her feet, ‘I’m so sorry. I wasn’t aware that the 
papers were to be checked before going to Special Collections.' 
Jay shook his head, turned away. 
‘So there was nothing of note at the house?’ asked Dana. 
‘Most of the papers he left at home were academic. Pages 
and pages of formulae and notes. Robert was always scrupulous 
about discretion. In fact I’m not sure anyone he worked with 
even knew the truth about his double life.' 
97 


PAGE 106:
Aifric Campbell 
'Really? I would have thought—' 
‘Remember the political climate in the 1950s. The Cold War, 
the nuclear threat, McCarthy on the loose, the panic about 
ICBMs, Senator Wherry kicking up a storm about homosexuals 
in government positions - America wasn’t just looking for reds 
under the beds, they were witch-hunting for sexual deviants. 
And there was Robert finishing up his PhD at Berkeley.’ Jay 
looked up from the bloody side of his steak. ‘Did you know that 
one of the first things Eisenhower did when he took office in 
1953 was to rule that homosexuality was a reason to be kicked 
out of a government job? The fact is, the so-called “purge of the 
perverts” was a much bigger deal than the hunt for 
communists. So it wasn’t like your Turing up at Cambridge 
where the environment was relatively tolerant of homosexu¬ 
ality.’ 
Dana ignored this snipe, making expert incisions in the side 
of her sole. 
‘The American Psychiatric Society officially listed homosex¬ 
uality as an illness in 1952,’ he continued. ‘People often assume 
that psychiatrists are more liberal than the rest of the popula¬ 
tion but this has rarely been the case. In the 1940s, for 
example, the president of the APA publicly defended the 
concept of segregated psychiatric hospitals for blacks. And it 
took twenty years for homosexuality to be de-listed. In 1973 
the APA finally accepted - by a small majority, mind you - that 
there was no evidence to support the definition of homosexu¬ 
ality as an illness. So they substituted it for the wonderfully 
creative term “sexual orientation disturbance”.’ He smiled, 
reaching for his glass. ‘I remember a patient called Marvin, 
whose doctor decided he suffered from this newly invented 
disorder. This was San Francisco, mid-seventies and Marvin 
was an aspirational transvestite who used to dress his tomcat in 
pink booties and a diamante collar every Sunday and parade the 
98 


PAGE 107:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
boards for the tourists on Pier 39. An exhibitionist who didn’t 
mind getting the odd kicking.’ 
Dana laughed and twirled her glass in a manner that was 
almost flirtatious. He cut a small section of meat onto his fork. 
,It is always satisfying to amuse a woman, he thought, biting 
into the pink flesh, and he was relieved to see that she ate 
heartily, unlike those women who proclaimed their hunger only 
to jab fastidiously at their plate. Jay had noticed a correlation 
between this lukewarm appetite for food and a lack of 
enthusiasm for oral sex, indeed for the whole carnal experience, 
as if these reluctant nibblers were incapable of abandoning 
themselves to any physical pleasure, so completely consumed 
were they by body dysmorphia. 
‘So what did Robert think about all this?’ said Dana. 
‘Oh, he wouldn’t have cared about the APA, he had no time 
for psychiatry and he didn’t believe in pressure groups. He 
wasn’t interested in carrying the torch for some political 
agenda. Robert had the arrogance of those who know that they 
are smarter than everyone else.’ 
‘But he did write a letter once,’ she said putting down her 
cutlery to rustle through her files. ‘In fact I’ve got the copy 
somewhere. In 1964 Robert wrote to a Judge Woodmansee on 
behalf of an ex-student who was a transvestite and had been 
indicted on indecency charges.' Here it is,’ she announced, 
sliding an indexed page out from the lower half of the pile. 
‘Robert writes: “Josef Stavrosky is a former graduate student of 
the Philosophy Department. He has worn cosmetics during the 
whole period of our acquaintance at UCLA and we are 
convinced this is his only social deviation. He has agreed to 
relinquish cosmetics and is willing to consult a psychiatrist as 
soon as either a clinic will accept him or he can afford private 
consultation.” The letter is signed by Robert and a colleague.’ 
‘That was a rare departure,’ Jay shrugged and waved away 
99 


PAGE 108:
Aifric Campbell 
the offered page. 
‘What about Vietnam? I mean, he did help to organise a 
number of student teach-ins at UCLA.’ 
‘That was a more acceptable majority situation. Safety in 
numbers. An easy outlet for any anti-establishment tendencies. 
He wasn’t totally immune to cultural influences.’ 
‘I think he might have been more of an activist than you 
realise—' 
‘Dana, people who weren’t around at the time can be 
forgiven for believing that everyone in the country was up in 
arms over Vietnam. But I can assure you that wasn’t the case. 
Robert was swept along on the protest wave and yes, he 
supported the anti-war strike on campus, but otherwise he 
really had very little time for politics.’ He slid the page back to 
her. ‘Robert was never a militant gay and he certainly never 
intended coming out. He had no time for the false camaraderie 
of the gay community.’ 
‘You think not even if he had lived?’ 
‘Robert just wanted to be able to fuck who he wanted and 
not get arrested,’ he snapped. Dana’s arm froze in recoil from 
her glass. 
Jay pressed a soothing hand to his temple and allowed a 
brief silence to linger, dismayed by the force of his outburst. 
‘Please excuse me, Dana,’ he said. ‘It’s a long time since I’ve 
spoken about Robert to anyone,’ he added. ‘And it’s proving 
more difficult than I thought.’ 
She nodded, lowering her head to her sole. But Jay was 
momentarily derailed, he'd always prided himself on being 
vigilant and sensitive to his own reflexes, it was a reliable way 
of predicting when clients were becoming intolerable and a sign 
that he should act to terminate rather than dwell on its origin. 
This had been the case, for example, in the summer of 1996, 
when Jay had been alarmed to realise that he was becoming 
100 


PAGE 109:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
aroused during his sessions with Robin, whose elaborate tales 
of promiscuity were so prosaic in their delivery and so 
cinematic in their detail, that Jay found himself struggling to 
quell his erection while Robin sprawled on the couch regaling 
him with stories of a prolific seduction which seemed to 
involve most of the women in his Whitehall office, as well as 
random females he met in bus shelters and in the elevator of 
his apartment block. Despite his best efforts. Jay came to envy 
Robin’s sexual fantasies, the lurid accounts of his sexual 
conquests and the soaring inventiveness of his imagination. 
After three months, he had become uncomfortable with his 
reflexive arousal and the fact that he looked forward with 
anticipation to each session. His collusion was merely encour¬ 
aging Robin to stay locked in the safe confines of his imaginary 
castle and Jay concluded that it was high time for reality and 
fantasy to converge. In the end it came as an aggressively 
handled acceleration towards truth and, although he knew that 
the confrontation would be anything but trauma-free for the 
client, he needed movement, which was why he decided on 
impulse to pierce their complicity with an abrupt intervention: 
‘Robin,’ said Jay, ‘I think it’s time that we talked about the truth 
of what is really happening in your life.’ 
He had broken the spell. Robin had lost his faithful 
audience, and he was furious in his humiliation, white rings of 
compressed anger circled his thin lips as he rubbed a clenched 
fist against his trouser leg. ‘You think I'm making it all up?’ 
‘Aren’t you?’ goaded Jay. ‘Isn’t this all wish fulfilment?’ 
‘I’ll show you,’ muttered Robin and stormed out into 
Edwardes Square trailing the banner of his shredded dignity 
behind him. Resolution came and, as Jay suspected, Robin 
found a way to deflect his anger. It turned out that he was very 
fortunate to have selected a woman who wouldn’t blow the 
whistle and go to the authorities, who was sensible enough to 
l o l 


PAGE 110:
Aifric Campbell 
realise that it would be her word against his and therefore 
impossible to prove anything under the circumstances. After 
all, as Robin pointed out, she had spent the evening drinking 
with him in the Slug and Lettuce and then let him pay for 
everything, even the cab to her place, so he could hardly be 
blamed for ignoring her last-minute change of heart, and it 
certainly wasn’t his fault that he couldn’t sustain an erection 
and grew so angry at his own humiliation that he was forced to 
use a hairbrush to penetrate her. ‘Anyway,’ said Robin, leaning 
back in Jay’s couch, ‘technically speaking it wasn’t rape. And 
it’s not like I was some stranger in a dark alley,’ and ‘NO,’ he 
definitely hadn’t developed a taste for it, he just wanted to 
crawl back into his fantasy life, he was never getting involved 
with real world women again. 
‘I wondered if you ever discussed his sexuality with Robert?’ 
Dana asked. 
Jay lowered his head to the plate, cut a tepid triangle of 
flesh. ‘We argued once,’ he said, surprising himself with this 
spontaneous admission that he was now forced to embellish. ‘I 
remember exactly where it was. We were walking down from 
Dodd Hall to Westwood Plaza, I was staying for the weekend, it 
would have been 1970 I guess, an exceptionally warm spring. 
There were students all over the grass, some outdoor tutorials 
on the lawn outside Royce. Robert had an ugly bruise around 
his right eye. I told him I was concerned for his safety.’ 
He could feel Robert’s clammy hand on his shoulder and 
hear the mocking whisper, ‘Aren’t you grateful to have a fag at 
close quarters to study? Didn’t your hero, the great Freud 
himself, say that there was much to learn from the study of our 
deviants?’ 
‘How did he respond?' 
102 


PAGE 111:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
‘Oh, he shrugged it off. Robert Was very stubborn. But he 
was also expedient. He wasn’t going to leave personal diaries 
lying around and I’m not sure he thought his liaisons worth 
writing about.’ 
‘So no letters, nothing?’ she said, quietly giving up on her 
sole. 
‘Dana, do you have any idea what it was really like to be out 
there? To be gay in the 1950s and ’60s, stalking the night with 
the queer bashers and the vice cops hiding in the bushes? The 
LAPD used to have a field day. You could get arrested for just 
holding hands with another guy. If you were convicted, you 
were registered as a sex offender. Believe me, you were not 
going to leave a roadmap of your encounters in your office.’ 
Jay placed his cutlery in a final perpendicular. He knew, of 
course. Curiosity had nibbled away at his teenage heart during 
Robert’s weekend visits to Stockton, until he was finally 
compelled to investigate his brother’s midnight disappearances 
during homecomings that were becoming more sporadic as the 
lure of music lessened. Jay could hear the sound of a ball 
thudding against the baseboard, he used to sit on the stoop on 
the first Friday of the month, watching every car that crawled 
by in a wide sweep of the tight corner, his mother’s shadow just 
inside the screen door, her manic humming fading in and out of 
the hallway as she changed a skirt or a blouse two or three 
times, primped her hair in the mirror, dabbed a crumpled tissue 
on her lips until the creases filled with an even slick of matt 
colour. ‘Well, well,’ she’d murmur as Jay passed the ball from 
hand to hand in a firm drop. 
11.48 pm on 3 June 1963 and Jay could bear it no longer. He 
lay in bed fully clothed, waiting for the creak of Robert’s foot on 
the floor as he crept along the corridor, pausing outside their 
mother’s bedroom door, which she always kept ajar at a precise 
30-degree angle. He listened for the soft latch click, the faint 
103 


PAGE 112:
Aifric Campbell 
squeak of the screen door hinge, the rumble of Robert’s car 
engine and then he leapt out of bed, ran tiptoed through the 
kitchen and out the back, trailed the Mustang on his bike 
through the crisp night, flying southwards on Pershing where a 
plump moon bulged in a velvet sky. It wasn’t difficult to keep 
up, for Robert was a zealous kerbside crawler, always trundling 
along as if every trip was a scenic drive. Jay sailed down the 
deserted sidewalks, wondering where his brother could be 
headed in this town that had nowhere to go and then the 
Mustang indicated right, a slow blinking red and a series of 
turns that took them down towards the harbour, the air fresher 
now with the night smell of water. Robert drove a half-mile 
along Port Harbour Road where a line of clapboard shacks 
petered out into scrubland and warehousing. The dark silhou¬ 
ette of grain silos loomed against the sky. Everything here was 
of monstrous proportion. Light pricks from the north side of 
the channel flickered on the black water and the night was full 
of creaks and clunks and whirrs, the sleep sounds of industry. 
The car stopped. Jay ducked behind a bush and lowered his 
bike to the ground. He crouched down, watched the car door 
open. Robert got out, stood still, white shirt glowing under the 
faint wash of a streetlight, head turning slowly sideways as if he 
was checking the air. He took a cigarette from his shirt pocket, 
the match flame spit-flashed in his glasses and he started to 
walk down the road. Jay followed on foot against the bushside 
until Robert stopped dead, his cigarette glow cutting a slow 
downwards sweep. He coughed. To his right, Jay saw the 
outline of two figures who seemed to glide across the road, like 
shadow actors slipping soundlessly onto a stage. Robert turned, 
rounded a quick left corner towards a windowless building, the 
shadows followed and Jay crept along, loping so close to the 
ground that he almost collided with a man who emerged 
suddenly from the sagebrush in front of him. Jay lunged 
104 


PAGE 113:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
sideways, scrabbled up the steep scrub slope on knees and 
scraped hands until he was level with the corrugated roof of a 
warehouse. He lay there holding his breath, but the man had 
disappeared. All around him was the rustling of night creatures 
in the undergrowth, barely audible against the clash of iron and 
steel clanging across the water. 
Jay crawled through the needlegrass towards the building 
until he came to a ravine where the ground fell away in a sharp 
thirty-foot drop and there below, was Robert’s white shirt 
kneeling on the ground, his head buried in the crotch of a slim 
shadow who stood impaled against the warehouse wall, arms 
splayed in crucifixion pose, his black face turned to the side, 
where, a few feet away, the other shadow stood smoking 
silently at the corner of the building under the weak illumina¬ 
tion of a wall-mounted light bulb. Robert’s head jerked 
backwards and he struggled to his feet, wiped a hand over his 
mouth as the second figure, taller and much more substantial 
than the first, crushed his cigarette with a swift heel and moved 
toward him in a smooth sidestep from the corner. He muttered 
something inaudible and Robert rummaged in his wallet as the 
shadow fumbled with his belt, one large hand pushing Robert’s 
face against the warehouse wall, so that all Jay could see were 
his brother’s trousers around his ankles as the shadow thrust 
into him. A low whistle cut through the air, the two figures 
melted into the night and Robert turned, panicked, clutched at 
his clothes and hobbled off stage. 
The morning after he had followed his brother to Port 
Harbour Road, Jay sat in the kitchen while his mother beat up a 
Sunday treat of pancakes in her bathrobe. At 8:46 Robert 
emerged with a sheaf of scribbled papers, rubbing his tired 
eyes. Jay sneaked a glance as he sat down at the table, 
wondering how it could have taken until now for the unarticu¬ 
lated truth to present itself. A furtive examination from behind 
105 


PAGE 114:
Aifric Campbell 
the cereal box revealed to his astonishment that Robert’s secret 
was everywhere, you only had to look at the pout of his thin 
lips, the exaggerated arch of his eyebrow, a glass-eyed bulge 
that was magnified and bovine, the limp hand passing over his 
thinning film of hair, a weak-wristed awkwardness with the 
teapot, the fastidious dance of manicured fingers on the curve 
of the sugar bowl: all his brother’s substance had vanished 
overnight, he was a sapped presence, forever altered. 
' “Breakfast of Champions”,’ Jay whispered, reading the logo 
on the Wheaties box. Robert’s mouth had just swallowed 
another man’s cum. Robert’s asshole had just gripped another 
man's dick. 
‘F - a - g,' he mouthed experimentally over his cereal, 
electrified by the impulse to shatter the breakfast stillness, the 
radio jingle, his mother’s egg-cracking hum. But he was 
suddenly overtaken by the sharp well of an imminent tear and, 
blinking urgently, he ducked behind the cereal as a burst of 
gunfire exploded in his head. A muted staccato of truths ripped 
through the air and Jay, for the first time, confronted the 
humiliating depths of his charmlessness, how he had consis¬ 
tently failed to captivate his distracted mother and his gifted 
brother, how he would never step inside their magic circle of 
love, his unworthy face would always be pressed up against the 
window pane. And now, there was new evidence of his own 
inability to seduce, as well as a further betrayal in the careless 
splurge of Robert’s affections on deep channel nigger boys, 
those anonymous shadows that could effortlessly turn his head 
and lure him away, while his own flesh and blood failed to 
engage. Their secret warm-blooded pulse throbbed through the 
kitchen, the house, his life, and Jay realised that what he had 
lost was the sum total of everything that he had never really 
had: his father, his mother, his brother, even the abandoned dog 
who expired the moment she was entrusted to his poisonous 
106 


PAGE 115:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
embrace. And he knew, with absolute certainty, that he had 
somehow failed forever in the great struggle for love, his 
fractured heart, its missing beat. 
107 


PAGE 116:
* ELEVEN * v 
‘Maybe it’s an unfair question,’ said Dana, ‘but I wondered if 
Robert had been a patient of yours, what would you have 
thought of him?’ 
‘You want me to psychoanalyse my own brother?’ My God, 
thought Jay, was there no end to her insolence? He was growing 
tired now of all this eagerness, or perhaps it was boredom, 
coupled with the St Emilion that seemed a little heavier than 
usual. Dana was blustering about with these questions, like a 
child in an attic kicking over boxes to see what might spill out. 
‘I’m curious. Can you separate the brother and the analyst?’ 
Her brazen stare indicated that she was unapologetic, encour¬ 
aged by the wine, or just naive enough to think that he might 
be prepared to oblige. She was looking for the kind of psycho¬ 
soundbite that had lately become so popular with biographers 
who think analysis is like personality profiling, another tool for 
the neat dissection of a life. 
Three days after the murder, Jay had started clearing out the 
desk in the corner of the living room at 3840 North Beverly in 
an attempt to try and impose some order on his fractured 
world. There was a bald patch in the carpet where Robert’s foot 
had worn down the brown weave during the hours he spent 
hunched over the desk. He would raise a hand in greeting 
without turning round and then immediately forget there was 
anyone in the room. Once Jay sat in the couch for five hours 
watching the white downy strip of neck bent in the loose shirt 
108 


PAGE 117:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
collar, listening to the studious sounds of genius - the irregular 
scratch of pencil like an animal scuttling across the page, the 
whispering crackle of paper, the occasional creak of a hardback, 
the clunk of a closing volume and then the silent consideration. 
The concentrated atmosphere around Robert’s motionless head 
seemed to vibrate and Jay would find his breathing quicken, as 
if he was struggling for air, but when he inhaled there was 
nothing, just a burning desperation accelerating into skull¬ 
splitting panic. And then the pencil moved again, Robert wrote, 
and Jay gasped, a future came back into view. 
Jay was squatting on the floor sorting documents into a 
cardboard box when Detective Green stopped by. He tapped out 
a cigarette while he flicked through a loose-leaf folder on 
Robert’s desk. ‘You read this stuff?’ he asked, jerking a head at 
a fragment of calculus. 
‘No,’ said Jay. ‘Robert was the mathematician.' 
‘Your brother took a lot of risks, know what I’m saying?’ 
Green said from behind the yellow flicker of his Zippo. ‘Ran 
with a bad crowd,’ he exhaled. ‘You keep well clear if you’ve got 
sense,’ and Jay’s protesting head shot up in amazement. 
‘Hey, I did time in Vice,’ Green sighed, scraping a paper clip 
underneath his fingernail. ‘The fags in Pershing Square?' he 
shook a disgusted head. ‘You wouldn't believe the stuff that 
goes on in this town.’ 
‘I guess it’s an unfair question,’ said Dana, twirling the stem of 
her glass. 
‘Analysis is internal and suggestive,’ said Jay, as the waiter 
removed their plates. ‘To paraphrase Wittgenstein, it provides 
us with explanations that many people are inclined to accept. 
So what would matter in analysis is what it would suggest to 
Robert.’ He reached for the water, running his tongue over the 
109 


PAGE 118:
Aifric Campbell 
roof of his mouth that was unaccountably dry. 
‘I wondered what you made of his promiscuity? His prefer¬ 
ence for anonymous black men?’ 
‘Robert liked to feast with panthers.’ 
‘Oscar Wilde,’ she said with a smile, keen to demonstrate 
that she has recognised a reference. 
‘My brother had a surprisingly well-adapted appetite for risk 
which fits perfectly with the natural arrogance of the gifted. 
Cruising was both rebellious and safe. Robert could have sex in 
a late night park and none of his respectable friends would 
know.’ He stared at her scribbling pen. ‘And perhaps he found 
the concept of dominance thrilling, it was after all, a rare 
sensation for a man of his extraordinary talent. Perhaps it was 
especially exciting for someone like Robert to experience that 
dominance from the kind of man that he would never be.’ 
‘So you would say that his homosexuality was a sort of 
power play?’ she asked. Seized by the frisson of indelicacy in a 
sibling analysis, Dana had decided it was worth running the 
gauntlet of his disapproval. Jay squeezed his palm around the 
wine bottle, he would like to smash his glass on the table 
between them, but instead he ignored her textbook simplicity 
and poured them both some wine. 
‘Was Robert always only interested in men?’ she asked and 
he startled both of them by laughing out loud. 
‘You want to know if his homosexuality was a sort of 
compensation or if he simply didn’t like pussy?’ She flushed 
and looked down at her fidgeting hands, grappled with the lid 
of her pen. 
‘I’m sorry to be so crude,’ Jay continued with an indulgent 
smile. ‘But you see, Dana, as a heterosexual - if I might be so 
bold as to presume your preferences - you view Robert’s 
homosexuality as an aberration, a deviation from the norm.’ He 
waved aside the beginnings of her protest. ‘You are flying back 
1 10 


PAGE 119:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
to LA tomorrow, so I don’t think we have time for political 
correctness, do you? The point I'm making is that you think 
sexual orientation is loaded with significance. You think it is 
defining. You think this is the stuff that biography is made of. 
And you want a ringside seat where the subject’s pants are 
down.’ 
Dana opened her mouth but stopped short at his raised 
hand; she was where Jay wanted her. Let her pay some price for 
her source. ‘Freud once wrote to a concerned mother that being 
homosexual was certainly no advantage, but it was nothing to 
worry about. It was not an illness, just a malfunction in the 
sexual development. So you are in good company, my dear. Of 
course, Freud’s rather mild remarks had some unfortunate 
consequences - I’m thinking here of the psychiatrists who 
administered aversion therapy and ECT to gays in America in 
the 1940s and ’50s. You see, Dana, the sinister side of 
understanding is the desire to correct. This idea - that 
homosexuality is a variation in sexual development that must 
be accounted for and explained - is what results in so much 
lengthy analysis. And, I should add, so much tedious detail in 
biography.’ 
Let her stew, he thought, watching Dana purse her lips. In 
her biography of Turing she had diligently paraded her biblio¬ 
graphic research into the environmental and cultural factors at 
work in sexuality, but Jay knew where she really wanted to go: 
/ 
down to the raw depths, to the places she could not go alone, 
she wanted to follow Robert just as Jay had followed him 
whenever he was home, watched him lavish attention on a host 
of nameless strangers all through 1963. Down Port Harbour 
Road or further afield, at dead ends where the harbour gave 
way to cropland, or in dirt tracks in the valley sink scrub that 
cut through what used to be the wetlands, Miss Purdey had 
sadly explained, until the irrigation programme dried out 
111 


PAGE 120:
Aifric Campbell 
millions of acres across San Joaquin County, and the songbirds 
and the ducks, the shorebirds and peregrine falcons all 
disappeared. Even when Robert returned tq UCLA after the 
weekend, Jay found that he carried on ghosting his brother’s 
haunts and finding new ones. It was like searching for bugs 
under rocks, not difficult when you knew their habits. Once 
he’d stopped beneath the hull of a moored freighter at duskfall 
and stood astride his bike watching three men swap a bottle in 
the dust, flicking stones at a coconut that was balanced on a 
crate. One of the men turned his head and offered Jay a go, with 
a sideways wink at the others. 
‘Come on, boy, let’s see what you’re made of,’ the man 
urged with a gap-toothed leer, his eyes locked on Jay’s delibera¬ 
tion, his brown arms snaked with purple tattoos. Jay wheeled 
his bike a little closer. The man slugged on the bottle, slid a 
slow hand into his trouser pocket, a slab of tongue wetting his 
lips and Jay stopped, scanned a cautious eye from the leader to 
the coconut. 
‘Reckon he’s jus’ chicken,’ said a voice behind him and Jay 
spun round to see a fourth man snuffspit on the ground ten feet 
away, a stained red bandana tied around his hairless skull. 
‘Reckon he’s jus’ a pretty boy,’ he said, dangling a curl of rope 
that was twisted round his left wrist. Jay jumped hard on the 
pedals as the men rocked with laughter and took pot-shots at 
the spinning wheels of his bike, one stone hitting blade-sharp 
in his shoulder but he rode away as if his life depended on it 
and didn’t stop once in all the eight miles home until he 
staggered breathless through the back door. ‘Your dinner’s in 
the oven,’ his mother yawned from the couch and Jay bent over 
the steaming plate, his thumping heart subsiding while she 
opened a magazine onto a photo of Jackie Kennedy’s face 
obscured by a black veil. She shook her head and turned the 
page, clucking her sympathetic lips. 
11 2 


PAGE 121:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
Despite his best efforts. Jay still agonised over the detail of 
his brother’s nocturnal transactions. It seemed vital to know 
the sexual specifics. Was Robert always the sucker or 
sometimes the suckee? Did a cock taste of piss? Did he always 
swallow? Did his asshole ever bleed? Did he kiss on the 
mouth? How many in one night? Did he drive home sore and 
sated? Did he long for more? Had he ever fucked a woman? But 
there was never a way of having the conversation and Jay 
struggled with the discomfort of being at his most puerile on 
those nights when he lay sleepless, peopling the night with a 
scripted melodrama of revulsion and hyperventilating rage, all 
saturated colour and vivid detail and freely available fucks. But 
he still braved a return every Saturday night, creeping out of the 
house after midnight to trail the shadows emerging from 
Robert’s underworld, he watched them fucked and paid for and 
disappear, leaving the night animals to reclaim their territory. 
One February night he saw a tiny kit fox for the first time, its 
long legs making a timid emergence from some culvert den, its 
white belly, silvery winter coat and blacktopped tail just visible 
in the brilliant starlight. He saw plump little kangaroo rats 
scuttle into abandoned pipelines in the scrub, he saw skulking 
coyotes and once even, a mountain lion - a procession of 
endangered species congregating in the hard-won peace of the 
night. 
All through the winter, he watched endless blow jobs, boys 
/ 
wiping their cum-streaked cheeks, men fucking in pairs, lone 
peepers who paid a few crumpled bills to choreograph a 
pantomime of tricks while they stood in the shadows biting 
down on their cigarettes. Once he even saw a writhing daisy 
chain of four men fucking, their bare asses ghostly in the moon- 
seared fog-night. He watched youth on age, black on white, 
white on white (but never black on black, he assumed it must 
happen elsewhere), and then one spring night from his incline 
113 


PAGE 122:
Aifric Campbell 
hiding place, he watched a kneeling blond boy blow a fat grey¬ 
haired man in a tired suit, both of them oblivious to the low 
rumble of an approaching car freewheeling down the sloping 
dirt track, until the sudden flood of headlights captured the 
frozen figures of the communing couple. The car doors flung 
open and a pair of college kids jumped out, chased after the 
blond but were too drunk, laughing too hard to tackle the steep 
hill so they turned back to the fat man and chain-whipped him 
across his shoulders until he collapsed with a single bone- 
splintering scream into a foetal curl, trousers entangled around 
his fleshy knees. Jay watched his unresisting judder as their 
boots thwacked the small of the fat man’s back, his belly, his 
head, until a sudden spray of blood spattered the trouser leg of 
the kicking boys and they stopped and staggered back to their 
car. They stood, swilling from beer bottles, gasping and 
swaying and then one of them took out his cock and pissed, 
giggling, on the head of the fat man who lay beaten and 
unconscious, while the other picked his wallet clean. They 
lingered uncertainly for a moment, as if there was something 
they might have forgotten, and then jumped back into the car 
and drove off in a wheel-spinning rev. 
Jay waited in the sagebrush inhaling its sharp smell, 
watching black blood seep from the fat man’s mouth. A fog 
wisp drifted over his smeared face. He considered the 
possibility that the man was dead, that he had witnessed a 
murder. But he stayed, braving the cold, wondering whose side 
he was on. He needed to see the end, to witness the 
consequence, to know who it was, exactly, that had it coming. 
Then the fat man stirred, resurrected himself with difficulty to 
a sitting position and leaned back against the warehouse wall. 
He fumbled in his pocket, found a crushed cigarette, held it 
unlit in his blood-soaked hands and sat immobile for so long 
that Jay thought he might have passed out again, when the 
1 1 4 


PAGE 123:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
sudden wail of his heartache shattered the still night and Jay 
looked down, horrified to realise that his own right hand had 
somehow slipped like a pickpocket inside the warmth of his 
trousers and was cradling his damp cock. He stumbled to his 
feet and ran fast and furious to his bike, pedalled at heart¬ 
bursting speed away from the flooding desire that had almost 
swallowed him unawares, racing along Center, along Vine, 
through the deserted streets, away from his flirtation with the 
outcast and delinquent, from the disintegrating line between 
voyeur and participant and the depravity that threatened to 
engulf him. 
Back home, twitching in his terrified bed, Jay forced himself 
to confront his ambivalent response to Robert’s promiscuity 
and this manworld, and he knew he was vacillating between 
hypnotic fascination and a ferocious disgust. He lay underneath 
the stifling blanket and probed right down to the core of his 
anxieties: the fear that his own curiosity might overwhelm his 
loathing and propel him towards these downtown couplings, 
that all this thirst for specifics might one day lead to someone 
else’s cock in his own asshole. 
In June 1964 Jay saw a group of boys in the schoolyard 
sniggering over a picture of gay men posing outside the Tool 
Box bar in San Francisco, torn from Life magazine’s photo 
spread immortalising a ‘sad and sordid world'. His private 
theatre was being turned into an art form, it was leaking into 
the public domain and Jay resolved to cease his nocturnal 
investigations, fearful that his adventures might be corrupting 
his consciousness. Like a searchlight bleaching out more 
wholesome fantasies, they had shifted his gaze to linger on 
classmates in the changing rooms, stolen glances at limb¬ 
swinging negroes on the street and so he took immediate 
corrective action. During his last two years at high school. Jay 
conducted a relentless predation on his female contemporaries 
l 1 5 


PAGE 124:
Aifric Campbell 
with a controlled professionalism that was remarkable amongst 
his peers. It was a joyless and methodical exploration of girlish 
delights: the sudden squeals and giggles and squirming, the 
snake-silky hair, the damp pantyhose stifling his nose, the 
hidden folds of flesh that were alternately slimy and musky or 
else raw-dry to taste, the bizarre secretions and unexpected 
smells, their invisible comings. More than anything. Jay was 
astonished at all the cuddling they seemed to expect. He sat in 
the back row of Stockton Movie Theater with popcorn balanced 
on his lap while their scented heads pressed against his 
shoulder, these girls who demanded interminable hand¬ 
holding, impossible gestures of affection and thoughtfulness, 
the whole business of sex for them a completely different 
concept, their unquenchable thirst for caring, as if a man 
should have vast reserves of nurturing in him. They nestled and 
snuggled up to him like needy babies. It was all distinctly 
unsavoury and he understood nothing except that there was a 
vast potential for shame. 
‘You're right about Robert’s archives,’ Dana announced, patting 
her envelope file. ‘There was no personal stuff in there from the 
early years. But that seemed to change in 1964.’ She looked at 
Jay with a belligerent calibration, trying to assess what he 
might know. ‘It’s in the detail that seeps into the papers - a 
theatre programme, a postcard, letters - a growing casualness. 
As if he’d stopped caring as much about leaving a trail. I 
wondered if you’d noticed anything around that time?’ 
‘You are forgetting I was just a kid. And of course I saw very 
little of Robert. He wasn’t coming home as much then.’ 
‘But you stayed with him in the spring vacation in 1964,’ she 
insisted. ‘He mentioned it in a scribbled response to someone’s 
invitation. It was the year he moved into North Beverly Drive. 
11 6 


PAGE 125:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
There’s a mention of your name in a note signed “Ish" 
Jay smoothed his irritation with a palmed sidesweep of the 
tablecloth. He would have to be pre-emptive here; it was the 
only workable tactic. ‘You mean Christopher Isherwood,’ he 
said. ‘He was a Regent’s professor at UCLA around that time.’ 
Of course Jay had noticed the change. He remembered an 
April evening, how he’d known something was up when Robert 
had collected him from Union Station, distracted, excited and 
even smelling of booze at 6pm. They were ‘going somewhere 
fun’, he said, instead of back to North Beverly and Jay resisted 
but Robert ignored him. ‘You’ll like it, some different kind of 
people.’ He veered off the freeway, twisting and turning 
through side streets until he pulled up untidily on a kerb 
somewhere in Santa Monica. Robert stood fiddling with his 
collar on the stoop when the door swung open and an older 
man with a flick of ashen hair over a tanned forehead said, 
‘Well, well, if isn’t our little philosopher,’ in an accent that 
seemed to come from the movies, looking not at Robert but at 
Jay. ‘I am Christopher,’ he said. ‘And you must be Robert's baby 
brother.’ 
Robert beamed behind his oversize glasses, toting Jay like a 
gift for the host, pushing him forward into a crowded living 
room where someone stuck a tumbler of bourbon in his hand. 
Christopher laughed, drifted past, beckoning a playful finger at 
Jay. 
'Are you a genius too?’ slurred a voice in his ear and he 
pulled back, knocking into a side table and sent his glass 
clattering to the ground. ‘Didn’t mean to frighten the children,’ 
said the man, leaning back against the door, licking his fleshy 
lips. 
‘Fuck you,’Jay growled, clenching his fists. 
‘Temper temper,’ goaded the man and blew him a kiss. Jay 
lurched forward but found his arms pinned behind him. The 
1 1 7 


PAGE 126:
Aifric Campbell 
man grinned. ‘Where's your sense of humour?’ Jay struggled 
free, found Robert in the kitchen chattering to a group. 
‘Let’s split,’ he whispered. 
‘What’s wrong, past your bed time?’ said the man with the 
fleshy lips and Jay could feel his face burn and his mouth go dry 
and Robert joined, flushed and excited, in the laughter of hyenas 
that reverberated through the house; he would fling his brother 
to the wolves just to make himself look interesting, offer him 
up as bait if that’s what it took to impress his new friends. 
‘I think meeting Isherwood might have been a turning point 
for Robert,’ said Dana eagerly. ‘You see, up till then his notes 
are mostly full of math and academic matters. But he started to 
attend Isherwood’s talks and was even reading his novels, 
according to the library slips I found in the archives. I think he 
was hanging out with a whole new scene, something far more 
adventurous than what he would have been used to - parties, 
writers and artists, very bohemian. And of course there were a 
lot of interesting people on the gay scene in LA in the mid¬ 
sixties,’ said Dana. ‘Isherwood could have introduced Robert to 
David Hockney, John Rechy, Gore Vidal—’ 
‘I’m sure the name dropping will make a wonderful sales 
pitch,’ said Jay. 
‘No, no, that’s not what I mean to suggest. It's just that you 
get the vague sense of liberation looking through Robert’s 
papers from the time he met Isherwood.’ 
‘Those people cared nothing for Robert. He was an amusing 
plaything, a geek, a groupie for a cast of self-absorbed mediocri¬ 
ties beached up in LA. But no doubt the references will help 
you sell your book.’ 
‘So you think Robert’s sexuality is irrelevant to his life 
story?’ 
‘Please don’t think me too patronising, Dana,’ Jay replied, 
‘when I say that you yourself can read any amount of psycho- 
11 8 


PAGE 127:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
analytic musings on the relevance and meaning of homosexu¬ 
ality. You don’t need me to outline them for you. So I will leave 
it to you, if you don’t mind, to do the legwork, to go through 
the literature and pluck out what's useful. Or what might 
capture your reader’s imagination. Isn’t that what writers do 
when they stray outside the comfort zone of their experience?’ 
‘So what’s your view then?’ she said with a sharpness that 
surprised him. This bold response to his face-slapping was 
impressive, like a snarling vixen who defends her corner from 
the baying hounds. 
‘I could suggest anything,’ he said. ‘Lack of fathering, no 
suitable male role models, over-identification with the mother- 
figure... I could say, as Freud did, that the infant is bisexual and 
that it is the influences in his early development that decide 
who will be the object of his sexual attentions and desires. I 
could even speculate that unsuccessful breast-feeding might 
have led to an oral obsession with sucking. I could say Robert 
had stalled in his development, stopped dead at the pre¬ 
pubertal stage, that he had never benefited from intimacy with 
his indifferent father, that his mother was stifling and 
dominant, that he was searching for his absent father in other 
men. In any man.’ He shrugged and leaned back in his chair. ‘Or 
I could conclude that Robert was entirely comfortable with his 
sexuality, his closetedness was just a sign of the times, a 
necessary precaution he took to preserve his reputation and his 
career. But what I will tell you, Dana, is that you are on the 
wrong track. Homosexuality didn’t shape Robert. It is inappro¬ 
priate in my view to view him through that prism. He might 
have spent time with a bunch of arty bohemians who sat 
around talking about sexual politics, but make no mistake 
about it, what was most relevant in Robert’s life, what he loved, 
what consumed him entirely, was his passion for his work. He 
spent almost every waking hour at his desk with his papers. He 
119 


PAGE 128:
Aifric Campbell 
was always working. He was obsessed.’ 
Dana opened her mouth and he waved aside her interjec¬ 
tion. ‘Have you ever known anyone like that? They are truly not 
of this world; they operate on a different plane. Ruthless with 
their time and their affections. They simply have no need of 
human distraction and the complication of relationships. They 
are on a mission, on a quest. That’s all the meaning you need.’ 
Dana steeled her jaw with the look of a reprimanded child. 
‘What do you do to let off steam?’ he asked with a gentle rap on 
the table. ‘You run? You drink? You get laid? Maybe that’s all 
there was to it. Robert worked fiercely hard all day and half the 
night and then, sometimes - I don’t know how often, I wasn’t 
living in LA - he would go out cruising and pick up a few tricks. 
Pershing Square, Griffith Park, wherever. He just acted on 
impulse and then it was over. Remember this was all pre-AIDS, 
pre-Stonewall even.’ 
The pen wilted in Dana’s hand. She had the air of a 
crestfallen beachcomber at low tide, suddenly pale and over¬ 
whelmed in the small slump of her shoulders. Jay wondered if 
she was losing her grip on the evening, on Robert, on the whole 
project. Or perhaps she was just losing heart, the thread of her 
story elusive now, taunting her from behind a tree like a child 
who hides far too long till the seeker grows weary and gives up 
the search. She stroked the back of her right hand, a slow slide 
from knuckle to wrist and back again. Like the kind of comfort 
one might offer to the dying, as if such a gesture could provide 
consolation in the face of impending oblivion. 
The waiter arrived to pour the last of the wine in the shifting 
silence that fell on the table. There was movement and bustle at 
the next table as the elegant brunette navigated a slow high 
impact return to her admirers after another extended absence. 
The men stumbled to their feet, one of them fussing with her 
chair, and for a moment she appeared startled, her hand strayed 
120 


PAGE 129:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
to her throat and there was a brief pause where Jay wondered if 
she might walk away, but she sat down and the table burst into 
animated chatter. 
Dana tucked back a strand of hair and started flicking 
backwards through her evening’s notes, like a Halloween child 
who runs home and dumps her bag on the table to check her 
trick-and-treating loot. The threaded beads around her cuff 
clinked against a small steel watch, a juxtaposition of ornament 
and function that struck him as distinctly unappealing. She 
reached for her glass of water and he saw the beginnings of a 
prim determination gathering about her lips. She had decided 
to cling on, she was not ready to capitulate, she was not easily 
deterred, her hand would be up in a minute with another 
answer for the teacher. She was still seeking what she had come 
for and why not, she was a researcher grubbing for useful 
versions of truth and Jay had something that she wanted. There 
was a certain robustness that he saw more infrequently these 
days, so used was he to spending time with the fragile and the 
lame. 
‘Did you ever think that Robert’s promiscuity would get him 
killed?’ she asked, low and fast. 
Jay looked away over her shoulder, recalled a moment, 
kaleidoscopic, indescribably fleeting, staring up at the steep 
crest of Mulholland at dawn. 
‘It did occur to me. The thought crossed my mind.’ 
1 2 l 


PAGE 130:
• TWELVE • v 
‘“Gentlemen/” said Jay, setting down his coffee, ‘“it is a fact 
that every philosopher of eminence for the last two centuries 
has either been murdered, or at the least, has been very near it; 
insomuch that if a man calls himself a philosopher, and never 
had his life attempted, rest assured there is nothing in him/” 
‘I’m not familiar with the quote,’ said Dana. 
‘Thomas de Quincey.’ 
A burst of laughter rose from a departing group who were 
shaking hands with the maitresse d’. Jay checked his watch. 
Although it was not yet eleven, the restaurant was thinning 
out. 
‘You want to hear about Murder Day/ he said and watched 
her hand slide across the tablecloth, a purposeful drift towards 
her pen, this insatiable appetite for detail and a beaverish 
conviction that she might one day make something useful of it. 
In the right hands, of course, Jay knew that it would all make a 
great story. But he did not believe that Dana was up to the task 
and he asked himself now, considering her alert composure, 
why he bothered to talk to her at all. Perhaps it was simply 
because, in thirty years, no one else had the vision to be 
curious, all they wanted was to glean what they could from 
Robert’s model theoretic proofs, his extraordinary brain, 
desperately trying to unpick his brilliance. 
‘Sunday, March 7, 1971/ he began, considering the pricks of 
light reflected in the steel glint of his spoon. ‘I called the LAPD 
122 


PAGE 131:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
just before 7 am. It took maybe five or six minutes for them to 
arrive.’ An uncooperative windlessness hung in the early 
morning as he stood waiting on the drive. He had pulled on a 
pair of jeans and a shirt and then wondered if it seemed callous 
to have done something so pre-emptive as thinking to dress. A 
morass of black ants spilled out of an arid corner by his bare 
feet. There was no wailing siren, no flashing lights, just the 
slow deflating crunch of tyres as they parked both cars at the 
foot of the slope. 
‘I watch Detective Green and his boys haul out of their cars. 
They are not in a hurry. I say something, I don’t remember 
what.’ 
Two uniforms disappeared round the back of the house 
while Detective Green emerged from the nearside car door. He 
paused for a moment and looked up into the trees, inspecting 
the hills from underneath the felt brim of his hat. 
The screen door to the back must have been open because 
the uniforms come back out through the front door. They call 
out to Green that the house is secure. I guess I’d assumed they 
would take my word for it, that there was no one inside.’ 
Green walked up the drive, stood on the threshold 
appearing to sniff the air and then turned back towards Jay, 
looked him over with a grey-eyed glance of cool appraisal. 
There was an investigative protocol to which Jay wasn’t privy. 
No introductory preliminaries, no handshake, just a perfunc¬ 
tory confirmation of his identity. 
‘You hear your brother come home last night?’ Green asked, 
as if in passing. A flat voice with all traces of accent ironed out. 
Jay shook his head. He had the vaguest memory of stirring to a 
sound in the night, but up there in the foothills there were 
often unexplained noises, sparsely populated as it was then, a 
dense topography of rustling raccoons and coyotes and bobcats, 
predators patrolling their nocturnal paradise. 
123 


PAGE 132:
Aifric Campbell 
‘I think it was the car engine that woke me so early. I can’t 
be sure. As soon as I opened my bedroom door I could feel the 
draught from the front door. They’d left it ajar. I ran down bare¬ 
chested as Robert’s Mustang pulled away, but I don’t know if 
they saw me. I watched the car disappear down towards 
Coldwater Canyon. It was sometime after 6am Sunday morning 
and there was no one about.’ He caught a glimpse of their 
fleeing outline, a confusion of limbs and clothing, a frantic 
fumbling in the front seat, but all he could really see were the 
distinguishing characteristics of generic black. There were two, 
maybe three of them, it wasn’t even possible to tell if Robert 
was in the car, but their hurry looked like the panic it clearly 
was. Jay understood immediately that he was witness to some 
crime and assumed a robbery, that Robert had finally got his 
comeuppance and been ripped off by some low-life rent boys. 
‘So you couldn’t be sure exactly what you saw?’ asked Dana. 
‘No.’ 
‘Wasn’t it still dark? I mean, March? In LA, in the early 
morning?’ 
‘You want to know if I can be sure that I saw two or more 
black guys getting into Robert’s car and driving off? You’re 
wondering if I am a reliable witness or if I filled in the blanks?’ 
He watched Dana bite down on her lip, considering herself 
rebuked, this little girl playing detective who didn’t quite have 
the stomach for his directness. 
‘It was only as the car disappeared round the bend that I 
realised I hadn’t seen Robert. My first thought was that he 
must be still asleep in the house. That they’d stolen the keys 
while he slept.’ 
A sudden splinter of birdsong shattered the air and Jay 
turned on his naked heel in the drive. Behind him, the alders 
rustled and already it felt lighter, his eyes registering the 
creeping advance of dawn. 
124 


PAGE 133:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
He didn’t call out as he climbed the quiet stair to the 
landing. In the shadowed mouth of Robert’s bedroom he could 
see the outline of the wardrobe, the end of the bed, a shoe on 
the floor, a heap of clothes bunched on the carpet. To his left, 
the bathroom door stood open wide, like an ominous invitation. 
‘The police made their way up the stairs, slowly, almost 
leisurely it seemed to me.’ 
It felt like stepping onto a film set where the actors were 
jaded and bored with the script, anxious to step into a new plot. 
Detective Green shouldered the doorjamb, staring down at the 
bathroom floor. Robert’s head was facing towards them, his 
legs in an outward sprawl either side of the WC. Green 
hunkered over the body in the centre of the camera-snapping 
crime scene. A slow rivulet of sweat trickled down between 
Jay’s shoulder blades. He swallowed hard, struggling to look 
anywhere but down to where Robert’s purple face was leering 
up at him. 
‘His face was... engorged, suffused with blood. His skin was 
pricked with a starburst of blood vessels. The whites of his eyes 
were speckled with red spider veins, as if a creeping disease had 
infected his face.’ 
‘I didn’t mean to—’ croaked Dana, in a vain attempt to stall 
this grim narrative, but Jay shook his head. She was still, poised 
on the brink of where her insistent curiosity had led her, right 
into the private chamber of someone else's horror. She lowered 
her lashes, had the good grace to appear humbled by what she 
had come looking for, this unseemly romp through his past, 
like a heedless child that tramples a flowerbed in her single- 
minded pursuit of a prize. She blinked as if stemming a tear, 
but it was too late now for her to affect a cheap remorse, Jay 
was made of tougher stuff and he would not stop until it was 
over. 
' “The nose and mouth are oozing a very minimal amount of 
125 


PAGE 134:
Aifric Campbell 
blood,”' he quoted. ‘“The sclerae show multiple patchily 
punctuated areas of hematoma. The ears are congested. The 
entire face is congested.’” 
Even now, thirty years later, Jay could reproduce the autopsy 
report word for word, with all its misspellings and grammatical 
transgressions. The language contained an incredible 
understatement of how Robert’s face had been, but a coroner, 
of course, would have seen it all before. On 10 March, 1971 Jay 
hesitated on the corner of Broadway and West Temple, looking 
up at the grey stone of the Hall of Justice, so familiar as a 
downtown landmark where, two years before, he’d stood 
watching a gaggle of long-haired girls chant support for Charles 
Manson who had been incarcerated on the fourteenth floor jail 
during his trial. Steeling himself underneath the arched 
entrance, he pushed through the revolving doors, hurried 
across the marbled hall and down the cool sweep of stairs to 
the basement, stopping by a drinking fountain to splash his 
face. A middle-aged woman sitting at a small desk administered 
the brisk bureaucracy of death with cheerful ease. She scanned 
Jay’s written request, didn’t blink at his relationship to the 
deceased and she didn’t offer condolences. For her, it was 
business as usual, another day, another dreary death. He waited 
on a brown plastic chair, contemplating the tremor in his left 
hand. Men and women sauntered in and out of the Coroner's 
Department like any other office workers, there was no sign 
that the city’s violent crime was taking any toll. Perhaps, at ten 
murders a week, the novelty was wearing thin. 
The receptionist called out his name. Jay approached her 
desk and signed a receipt for a copy of file number 71-2755. 
Outside, the sidewalk was empty in the midday sun and he sat 
down on a stone ledge, steadying himself against the dizzying 
sound of traffic and the prospect of what might be revealed by 
the documents he held in his damp hand, the transcript of the 
126 


PAGE 135:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
events that had occurred in Crypt Number Three, the secrets of 
the dead prised from their stiff fingers. 
The body is that of an adult male which appears to be slightly older 
than 40 years, weight of 155 pounds and height of 65^2 inches. The 
body has not been embalmed and it shows a marked rigor and livor 
mortis. 
In the end, reading the report had proved to be a therapeutic 
experience. Jay sat shaded from the stark spring sun by a squat 
spray of palm, immersed in the bland language of observable 
fact, stripped bare of sensationalism, a syntax that wouldn’t 
inflame, words that insulated from the passions they regarded. 
It was a reassuring, orderly reconstruction of the advancing 
footsteps of death. The body is opened by a Y-shaped incision, Dr 
Alexi Hererra announced on page 2. Jay imagined the gowned 
pathologist raising his gleaming scalpel over Robert’s cadaver 
as he began his chronicle of indisputable fact, a methodical 
account of all that he could say he was certain: the weight of the 
brain, the heart, the state of the organs, the sum of collected 
data that revealed absolutely nothing about the man, or, 
indeed, the truth. 
‘What can be said at all, can be said clearly,' Jay quipped, but 
Dana met his smile with an apprehensive glance. He has, of 
course, unsettled her with his macabre quotes and she did not 
appreciate the irony, that her beloved Vienna Circle would have 
considered the autopsy an entirely appropriate form for a dead 
scientist. Dr Hererra produced a most diligent document, 
unsullied by emotion, untainted by intimate connection, 
neither cinematic nor dramatic. There was nothing about what 
it felt like to watch, nothing about the raw experience or what 
Jay had to endure when he beheld his brother naked on the 
bathroom floor. He’d been horrified by how lifeless Robert 
looked when, only minutes before, he had cradled his warmth 
127 


PAGE 136:
Aifric Campbell 
in his arms, how unrelated he seemed to the brother he knew, 
bathed in the fluorescence of death. It was the first dead body 
he had ever seen. 
‘His face was cyanosed,' said Jay and sipped from his glass. 
Dana made a small inquiring movement of the head. The 
medical term for a face turning blue,’ he explained with relish, 
savouring the term, its poetic precision but she simply nodded, 
didn’t even write it down and this, he reflected, was precisely 
what lay at the heart of Dana’s shortcomings as a writer. She 
was not bewitched by language, she didn’t linger over words, 
their unfathomable secrets, she was not enthralled by linguistic 
propagation, by the miracle of inventiveness that can spawn 
such gems as ‘cyanosed’, she didn’t savour the gift of a 
sentence, she did not delight in how a word defines the object 
and becomes forever inseparable from the concept. And this, of 
course, the very essence of humanity, was the universe that 
Robert had set out to conquer. He would reduce language to a 
quantifiable process, peel back the skin to reveal a luxuriant 
semantic abundance, pare it all down to dry matter in a series 
of logical clauses. He would conduct his own autopsy to excise 
its tumorous ambiguity, classify and grade the natural exuber¬ 
ance, demystify the miracle, bag it up and explain it away. It 
was a deflowering, this desire to harness the fundamental 
power of language and it was preposterous, Jay thought even 
now, Robert’s claim that he could account for all this; it was 
tantamount to a rejection of language as irrational, illogical, 
inexplicable, impure. Perhaps it was a response born out of fear 
- a fear of the inexpressible, of all that cannot be explained. 
‘You know,’ Jay mused, ‘the irony was that the autopsy 
confirmed Robert was very healthy. A little overweight towards 
the end, but he never worried about running to fat, he was 
above concern with such trivia.’ 
In fact, it was Robert’s surprising flabbiness that had so 
128 


PAGE 137:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
appalled Jay when he’d found him on the bathroom floor - the 
unembarrassed paunch, an unpleasant excess of flesh that had 
been so efficiently disguised by clothes, but was so striking in 
his nakedness. 
‘But he was very particular about his hands and nails,’ he 
said, recalling the meticulous banality of the report: The hands, 
fists and nails are unremarkable. ‘Like most musicians, they were 
always his best-maintained feature. Sometimes he’d come 
home from hours on the organ with his fingers aching from so 
much practice and my mother would massage his hands with a 
little oil. She taught him how to manicure with a metal file.’ 
When Jay was seven years old, Robert had ruined the 
surprise of collecting him from school by deciding on impulse 
that he would teach him to play the piano in the abandoned 
hush of the assembly hall. Jay sat with his legs dangling on the 
stool, staring down at the black-and-white expanse, struggling 
to decipher the flood of instructions, the unintelligible 
symmetry of a keyboard, its unreachable extremes. It was 
difficult for Robert to tolerate his little brother’s clunking 
mental process, brimming as he was with an enthusiasm for 
moulding him in his own likeness with a handful of careless 
hours here and there, expecting him to deliver the goods in one 
session, like the half-hearted way an owner might train a dog. 
‘If you just concentrated, you could do much better than this,’ 
he sighed after a few minutes, but Jay’s breath was coming 
short and shallow as his clumsy fingers blundered about on the 
keys, his vision blurred by the threat of angry tears. ‘Listen to 
this,’ said Robert impatiently, shunting him to the edge of the 
stool and flexing his elbows to play, a masterful, effortless 
three-part invention that filled the empty hall with an extrava¬ 
gant spill of notes, every floorboard resonating with the 
glorious complexity. Jay placed a delicate finger on the 
underside of the piano to feel the vibration as Robert's transfor- 
129 


PAGE 138:
Aifric Campbell 
mational hands flew over the keys, his head bent in concentra¬ 
tion, consumed by the magnificence of his own outpouring, the 
impact he had on the world, the sheer magic of his gift. He 
played on, the lesson forgotten, Jay’s presence, in fact, 
forgotten, so that the reluctant pupil could slip down unnoticed 
from the stool and sneak out the door, running all the way 
along the perimeter fence to the bike shed, cutting through the 
gap onto the street where a warm breeze lapped against his 
cheeks. He rode blind, a frenzied pedalling that must surely one 
day yield some result, but was, for the moment at least, 
directionless, spinning, burning with random intent, his ears 
throbbing so hard that he thought his head would explode and 
his heart seize up for want of beating. 
‘The police took one look in the bathroom and they made up 
their minds,’ Jay continued, watching Dana’s pen glide across 
the page. 
‘Your brother usually bring his boys back here?’ Green said 
as he knelt over Robert’s body, his eyes travelling slowly around 
the room. 
‘How do you know about that?’ asked Jay. 
Green jerked a thumb at the jar of Vaseline on the 
washstand. ‘You pick up a few things after twenty years on the 
job.’ 
He pointed to a twisted white skein of cloth underneath 
Robert’s bruised neck. ‘Recognise that? Or the tie?’ he 
indicated the brown and purple striped ribbon that stuck out 
under Robert’s shoulder. 
‘He was wearing it last night.’ 
‘Show me where you were,’ said Green, rising to his feet to 
follow him across the narrow landing into the second bedroom. 
The contents of Jay’s jeans pockets lay on the bedside table 
130 


PAGE 139:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
where he had dumped them the previous night. The keys to his 
rental in San Francisco, his student ID for the SFSP, some loose 
change. A round-trip bus ticket for Tuesday that he wouldn’t 
now be taking. 
The body condition was described as viewable in the report, 
but even the undertakers couldn’t disguise the face.’ 
In the days after he read the autopsy Jay had been obsessed 
with the physiological minutiae and had found himself poring 
over Gray’s Anatomy in the library, examining the facts; like why 
each lung might weigh a different amount, what was meant by 
poorly concentrated bile in the spleen, how the body is reduced 
to the sum total of its components, how it all added up, with no 
missing parts, the incredible fragility of life. 
He turned away, scanned the depleted restaurant, but 
nothing could distract from the relentless onslaught of 
remembrance. The skull shows no evidence of any trauma. The only 
unusual feature is edema. He could hear the wheeze of the saw 
above the sound of the subsiding chatter, smell the acrid 
burning stench of splintered bone as Dr Hererra hacked 
through Robert’s skull and prised open the tabernacle of 
genius. The brain is markedly congested and weighs 1530 grams, 
which is way above normal. 
Average brain weight. Jay subsequently discovered, was 
1400 grams and it seemed extraordinary that exceptional ability 
could not be detected in its wet grey tangle. Had Dr Hererra 
guessed he was in the presence of a pristine intellect? As he 
watched the scales settle, did he calculate the cost of all that 
was now lost to the world? 
The heart, Jay recalled, closing his eyes, weighs 340 grams. The 
cardiac chambers are normally developed. The valves are smooth and 
pliable. As it quivered on the cold steel dish, that vibrant 
dripping heart that had pumped a furious energy, could they 
read the signs of all those nights in Griffith Park, Robert’s 
13 l 


PAGE 140:
Aifric Campbell 
mouth impaled on a black dick, his fingers groping for some 
new experience? And could they read the imprint of his 
mother’s love, skewered now by grief thirty miles up the road 
in her little duplex? Such a paltry thing to need, 340 grams of 
love. 
On the last page of the coroner’s report someone had 
scribbled: 
Detectives Green requested/ anal/ smear. 
And then a final typewritten addendum: There was no semen 
present. 
‘We buried him at Oakwood Memorial. It was a closed casket.’ 
Jay had stood by the graveside imagining Robert’s corpse 
patched up with an artless needlework. He assumed they didn’t 
need to take a great deal of care with the stitching on cadavers. 
‘My mother didn’t look, she wanted to remember him the way 
he was.’ As a child particularly, Jay suspected, or perhaps those 
times when Robert laid his head in her lap on the couch at 1152 
Woodward and she soothed his brow in the evening calm. Jay 
lingered in the doorway, witnessing this quiet transaction of 
love beneath a 1956 calendar that had the same picture of the 
blind gaze of the Statue of Liberty on every page, a quiet confir¬ 
mation of stasis. His mother smiled down at Robert’s still head, 
his eyes closed, breathing deeply under the caress of her 
smooth-browed peace and the regular stroke of her palm as she 
streamlined the pressures of his greatness. And it seemed to Jay 
that all three of them could stay that way for hours until he 
finally drifted into sleep doubled up on the floor, imagining he 
too was swooning under the gentle pressure of his mother’s 
hand. 
132 


PAGE 141:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
‘I’m wondering—’ Dana hesitated. Jay waited. She has done 
this before, stirred up mud in a pond and learnt to tread 
carefully, to be wary of prodding a nerve with a forensic 
enthusiasm that might juggernaut over sentiment. 
‘D’you think,’ she said, leaning closer to the table, ‘that the 
police investigated the case properly?’ 
Jay ran a firm quick hand across the tablecloth in an effort to 
soothe his annoyance at the suggestion that she could 
somehow breeze in and spot something that everyone else has 
missed. 
‘The LAPD’s antipathy for homosexuals was well-known, 
but what do you really expect a couple of detectives would 
think when they arrived at 3840 North Beverly Drive? Picture 
the scene through their eyes: a naked white guy lying strangled 
on his bathroom floor, no signs of forced entry, a known gay 
with a taste for cruising in the badlands of downtown and 
picking up black guys. What they thought when they stood in 
that bathroom was this: Robert knew the risks. He was 
careless. He took too many chances. The cops did as much as 
you could expect. They went downtown, hassled a few known 
degenerates round Hope Street, Pershing Square, all the usual 
hang-outs. They got all the verification they needed about 
Robert’s habits. They found his car on Spring Street but there 
were no prints that they could match. It was a dead end.’ 
Afterwards in the kitchen. Detective Green scratched at his 
chest while he dictated his summary report to Lieutenant 
Rosenback who wrote it all down sitting at the table. Jay sat 
staring at the chequered lino, fingers inside his pocket tapping 
his thigh. He was waiting to be told something, some explana¬ 
tion of what the cops believed had happened, although they of 
course knew no more about the incident than he. All through 
the morning he kept hearing the mournful loop of ‘Wachet 
Auf’, a most unusual occurrence, for he had never shared 
133 


PAGE 142:
Aifric Campbell 
Robert’s affection for Bach. It was extraordinary, he mused, 
how trivial detail looms so large and vivid in memory, the 
stubborn adherence of commonplace in recall, like the clear 
articulation by his third grade teacher that she just adored 
apple sauce, or the cab driver in Houston who told him he’d 
once kissed a girl called Venus, the fleeting scent of wet grass or 
an unnameable flower, a particular shade of red. Jay could hear 
the crackle of the police radios that shattered the morning quiet 
of the house, the smack of peeling crime scene tape, the 
clicking camera shutters, the smell of cigarette smoke, the slow 
heavy footsteps of the night shift up and down the stairs, for 
they were all tired, the call had come in just as they were going 
off duty. 
‘Incident: Homi strangulation,' Green dictated, stirring his 
coffee. They were hours into overtime and he wanted to file the 
report as soon as possible. He leaned back and stretched his 
arms wide, his ass spilling over the side of the kitchen stool. 
‘Decedent is an instructor and Professor of Logic at UCLA and 
lives at 3840 North Beverly Drive in the vicinity of Mulholland 
Drive and Coldwater Canyon.’ 
Rosenback scratched away in his notebook. Green pulled a 
pack of cigarettes out of his shirtsleeve. ‘Decedent’s brother, Mr 
Jay Hamilton, was staying for the weekend and witnessed the 
below.’ Green patted his pocket for a Zippo. ‘Decedent arrived 
at 20:00 hours on Saturday evening when Mr Jay Hamilton was 
already there. Decedent said he was going for a ride downtown, 
as he sometimes does. Mr Jay Hamilton stated that he was 
going to bed and retired for the evening at around 22:00.’ 
Green stood up, moved to the kitchen window and tipped his 
cigarette ash into the sink. 
‘There were a couple of quakes in the basin last night,’ he 
said, addressing no one in particular. ‘Felt the tremors 
downtown.’ Jay followed his gaze out to the beginnings of a fair 
134 


PAGE 143:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
day; the thermometer on the deck had already inched up to 59 
degrees. 
‘This morning sometime after 6 am,’ Green continued, ‘Mr 
Jay Hamilton heard a car start. He went out to the driveway and 
observed two or three male Negro occupants inside Decedent’s 
vehicle. He did not observe Decedent.’ Green swivelled towards 
Jay looking for confirmation. ‘Mr Jay Hamilton then went 
upstairs to check on his brother’s wellbeing and found 
Decedent lying on the bathroom floor. The LAPD was 
summoned by Mr Jay Hamilton and Decedent was pronounced 
dead on above date at time?’ He looked over at Rosenback and 
cracked a large knuckle. 
‘07:25 hours.' 
‘Decedent was lying supine on the bathroom floor,’ said 
Green, turning back to the table. ‘Decedent was naked,’ he 
added, lifting up the LA Times from the table in front of him to 
study a photo of Trudeau and his bride Margaret skiing on 
honeymoon. ‘What about this,’ he snorted, tapping the front 
page. ‘Says here a Sacred Heart of Mary nun conspired to 
kidnap Henry Kissinger.’ 
Rosenback lifted his large square head and grinned, expertly 
flicking his pen between index and middle finger. Green folded 
the paper and let it fall back on the table, took a deep puckered 
drag from his cigarette. 
‘There was fecal matter on the bathtub and on Decedent,’ he 
said. ‘A small jar of petroleum jelly, or Vaseline, was noted to be 
lying on the bathroom washstand.’ 
Jay set his jaw against a sudden swell of outrage at the filth 
and grime that surrounded them. It was typical of Robert not to 
notice how slovenly it had all become: the kitchen with its 
scuffed lino torn at the edges, a multitude of old footprints 
browning the white squares, the table top encrusted with 
scraps of solidified food, the window pane where someone had 
135 


PAGE 144:
Aifric Campbell 
elbowed a view through the irregular smears; but Robert, lying 
dead upstairs on the bathroom floor, would dismiss such 
trifling considerations, operating as he did on a much higher 
plane and now the squalor of his personal circumstances was 
revealed for all to see, the naked spill of his flesh sprinkled with 
his own shit. 
‘Let's hear it,' said Green, resting a hand on Rosenback's 
shoulder. The lieutenant bent his head over the report and 
opened his mouth. 
‘Detective Green?' A uniform interrupted from the threshold 
and Green raised a silencing hand while Rosenback duly read 
aloud what he had written. 
‘One more thing,’ said Green. ‘Mr Jay Hamilton stated that 
Decedent was a known homosexual.’ Three pairs of eyes turned 
expectantly to Jay who straightened up in his stool. 
‘Yes,’ he said, with schoolboy reluctance. 
‘And had a particular preference for male Negro compan¬ 
ions?’ Green prompted. The audience watched and waited. Jay 
nodded and looked away. 
‘Add all that in,’ he said to Rosenback who sat with his 
mouth agape. 
‘Ready to remove the body, sir,’ said the uniform. 
Green assented with a sideways gesture of his head and said 
to the lieutenant, ‘Note down that the house was not secured 
at 13:05 as police investigation was still in progress after the 
body was removed from the scene.’ 
Even in the methodical chaos of a murder investigation, a 
certain flatness filled the house. The detectives seemed more 
incurious than Jay had expected in the execution of duty, but 
that might have been because there were no signs of forced 
entry or struggle, no sign of beating or assault or rape, no 
136 


PAGE 145:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
robbery that they could see, except for the stolen car. Any 
money taken would have been all that was in Robert’s wallet - 
forty bucks tops according to a cursory glance at his bank 
account. Slowly Jay had realised that this murder, for all its 
remarkable rarity in his day, was mundane for them. And there 
were no victims. No children, no wife, no lives destroyed but 
that of a man who was old enough and wise enough to have 
calculated the risks. As he stood behind Green watching the 
gurney’s slow progression down the drive, he began to 
understand that this murder was of a type, an unsolvable type 
and that Robert, who had mattered so much in life, would find 
a democratic levelling in death. Jay had seen the toe tag before 
they zipped up the body bag. 
After they finally left, he sat for a long time on the deck in 
the unseasonable warmth while birds rustled in the alders and 
a golden lizard picked its jerky trail along the planks before it 
vanished into the undergrowth. By mid-afternoon, the sky had 
cleared and Jay watched a private parade of memories unroll all 
around him, but all of it was happening somewhere outside his 
emotional range, as if the force of Robert’s death had silenced 
his world, and he wondered if it was like having airplane ear, 
where everything is muted until it pops and you shout in the 
transition. 
‘Jay, I’m so sorry,’ Dana said. He stared down at the pale crouch 
of her ringless hand that now covered his and was seized by a 
sudden longing to lift and stroke it along the side of his face, 
like a mother might trace the contours of her child. 
‘Yes,’ he said, because he could not immediately think what 
else to say. His hand slid out from under hers, raised itself 
towards her cheek in a fleeting gesture that could be construed 
as encouraging and paternal and might even invite her to tilt 
137 


PAGE 146:
Aifric Campbell 
very slightly into his touch if he hadn’t let it fall back to the 
table. 
‘I sometimes feel a bit like a dog at a bone.’ Dana admitted 
with a mawkish smile, an infuriating twitch of the mouth’s 
extremities, as if a half-hearted apology might disguise her true 
investigative zeal. 
‘You need to be single-minded. To find your story.’ 
‘To find the truth,’ she corrected. 
‘But what is the truth in a life?’ he replied. ‘Even Napoleon 
admitted that history is nothing more than a fable agreed upon. 
Remind me how that famous little syllogism of Turing’s goes?’ 
‘Turing believes machines think,’ she enunciated, reveren¬ 
tially as a prayer. ‘Turing lies with men. Therefore machines do 
not think.' 
l 38 


PAGE 147:
• THIRTEEN • 
Dana excused herself and made a slender retreat to the ladies. 
Jay had registered the reflex glances of other men when they 
arrived at the restaurant: Dana was keeping herself well, with 
the attentiveness of someone who is still available, although he 
had noticed her unmanicured hands, the kind of grooming 
detail that women like her neglect, like their arrogant disregard 
for a trim bikini line. But somewhere at the centre of all this 
self-possession would be the footprint of a man, for Jay had 
long ago concluded that the fatal design flaw in female 
psychopathology was their susceptibility to the male. Alive or 
dead, current or ex, real or imagined, there is always a man at 
the centrepiece of a woman’s life. It is the ruling object, the 
magnetic north and the killer blow that sucks them dry: the 
lump in the couch, the bundle in the crib, the architect of a 
fractured self-image. 
Rose was a recent case history in point. She had come to Jay 
complaining of loss of appetite and insomnia after her house 
was burgled while she was away for the weekend. She felt 
violated by the thought of a stranger standing in her bedroom, 
touching her pillow, rifling through her possessions. She 
confessed to Jay, eyes averted and appalled, that she imagined 
the burglar fingering through her underwear drawer and now 
she couldn’t sleep for wondering what he had looked like, how 
he smelt, so she lay awake at night waiting for his return. His 
presence had invaded the house, she longed to know the colour 
139 


PAGE 148:
Aifric Campbell 
of his hair and eyes, his name, the sound of his voice and she 
felt that if he did not come back she would surely lose her 
sanity. Jay suggested that her fear was based on her own desire 
to have been present when the burglar was there - that it was, 
in fact, a rape fantasy. The intruder had rejected her by coming 
at a time when he knew she wasn’t there, it was a confirmation 
of her unattractiveness. 
Rose admitted that it was seven years and three months 
since her fiance had broken off their engagement. She had 
retaliated by rendering herself invisible as punishment for her 
own inadequacy and smeared a dedicated landscape of misery 
all over her days. ‘What shall I do?’ she sobbed. ‘I can’t bear it 
anymore.’ Nor, it seemed, could Jay, who had originally thought 
Rose might be a candidate for his short story collection, but 
had since revised his opinion and therefore decided to dispense 
with their therapeutic alliance by giving her some sound advice. 
'I’m going to be very frank with you, Rose,’ he said as she 
stared at him through her jagged fringe. ‘I am going to tell you 
how to take charge of your life.’ She nodded, in concentrated 
anticipation. ‘You need to get a makeover, a complete overhaul. 
And,’ he added with an encouraging smile, ‘you need to get 
laid.’ 
The waiter returned with the paperwork. The restaurant was 
virtually empty and Jay realised that he had missed the finale of 
the temptress and her consorts, so distracted was he by 
memory and recall. He checked his watch, he would be home 
by midnight to prowl around the dark confines of his study 
wondering how to proceed with Cora’s story. 
‘It feels like we’ve had so little time to talk,’ said Dana, 
sliding into the banquette. She had retouched her lipstick and 
run a brush through her curls and in the flickering light, Jay 
140 


PAGE 149:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
noted a suggestion of pink along the cheekbone, a sliver of 
tongue wet her lower lip, and he wondered if, when her head 
hit the pillow tonight, she might well ask herself whether or 
not she should have slept with him. He imagined the questions 
that would nag her restless sleep: Would sex with a psychoana¬ 
lyst be like fucking a gynaecologist? Would she be just another 
clitoris past its best? Would he be able to tell if she was faking 
it? Would he be able to read her sexual history in the taste of 
her wetness and would she feel, when his fingers slid inside 
her, like she was strapped in a consultant’s chair, her stirruped 
legs quivering about his head? Or might Jay be the consum¬ 
mate lover, the kind who could turn to her in an elevator and 
between the ground and third floor bring her to the brink of a 
desperate yearning? Would he anticipate her transient fantasies 
with a sudden fuck in the pre-dawn? Would the imprint of all 
past lovers be obliterated (he estimated low double digits) and 
would he close the departing door and leave her aching for 
more? 
Jay doubted that Dana makes the first physical move. He 
wondered how she liked it. 
‘Maybe Jay, you might have some time tomorrow morning 
before I leave?’ she asked. Now, at the end of the evening, as 
the restaurant shed its last diners out into a light sleet, she was 
worried that she had been hasty. Their imminent separation 
cast an urgent pool of light over what hadn’t been won and the 
prize became all the more alluring in parting. Jay was the 
closest Dana would ever come to her subject, she could feel a 
good source slipping out of her reach. But he was done with her 
pestering, her earnest questions and he wished now to be 
alone, the whole business has sapped him of energy. She waited 
for his answer, leaning expectantly across the table and she 
seemed to Jay to occupy an extraordinary amount of space, as if 
she had somehow grown more substantial over dinner. It was 
1 41 


PAGE 150:
Aifric Campbell 
tiredness, he thought, an extraordinary fatigue that had 
enveloped him. 
‘I’m afraid I have a client appointment first thing in the 
morning,’ he said, standing up, although it struck him now 
with certainty that Cora Miller would not show up for her 8 am 
appointment. In fact, he thought as he lifted Dana’s satchel, he 
did not now believe that Cora had gone to her doctor but would 
have somehow managed to make it home to sit all night 
hunched and hyperventilating in her living room, staring at the 
floor. A street light bisected the darkness; the ansaphone sound 
of Larry’s voice confirming he’s on the red-eye Friday and 
looking forward to seeing her. ‘Miss you honey,’ he would yawn 
before ringing off but Cora would no longer hear, a fierce 
roaring in her ears that drowned out everything but the 
senseless muttering of her own distress calls. 
‘Let’s get you a ride,’ said Jay, his offer sounding like a curt 
dismissal as they stepped out into a wet slap of wind. Dana 
shivered and turned up her collar and Jay had the sense that 
Robert had fled, his binding presence dissolved in the midnight 
rain. A clutch of unavailable cabs rumbled westwards in a hiss 
of spray. He stepped forwards onto the kerb, a light mist 
beading his face as he scanned the eastbound traffic across the 
street. Dana stood behind him under the awning, her arms 
cross-wrapped tightly around her body to fend off the cold, and 
he was reminded of Cora sinking down inside her coat this 
afternoon. He recalled her fifth session where she had 
presented him with a detailed and colourful account of a second 
dream. Cora was playing on giant grey boulders in a yellow sea 
and had swum out to a distant island where she found a colony 
of giraffes. She pleaded with a mother giraffe to borrow a baby, 
which she tucked to her breast secured by string and swam 
through the yellow sea back to the mainland. ‘The next thing I 
knew is I was in some sort of military operation in Asia, holed 
142 


PAGE 151:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
up in a villa with all this elaborate technology and surveillance 
devices. I was there to rescue some mountain children, but we 
were losing the battle, the terrorists were multiplying so I 
decided to cut my losses and sneak out of the house. But I 
forgot that it was school-going time. Down the mountainside 
were snakes of children being led to class by armed and masked 
men. They were like hundreds of dots of colour getting closer 
and closer, singing that song kids sing in Club Med, “Oh la-la, 
le mini club est la”. I lay on my side behind a broadleaf bush 
outside the house. The men shouted instructions and the 
children stopped right in front of my hiding place, they were 
picking at each other, looking round and I thought please please 
don’t see me and then a boy of about six slowly raised his finger 
and pointed at the bush, and I knew it was my eyes that had 
given me away. The men dragged me out and the leader held up 
a garrotting wire and I woke up screaming.’ 
A sheet of rain struck Jay’s cheek, he heard the sudden wail 
of a police siren and at that precise moment, he realised with an 
exquisite force that he had found his story. Of course, he smiled 
at the blue light speeding past, it was there all along, the seed 
had lain in quiet germination all through these last weeks and 
was now ready to burst into bloom. He could feel the plot 
building, light breaking behind closed lids, he could see the 
outer limits, his fingers barely touching the keyboard, for 
Cora’s story would write itself. He could almost hear her 
communing with him, illuminated in the corner of his room 
like the artist’s muse. 
A lighted cab bore down upon them. Dana lingered in the 
open door, but Jay was impatient to be gone now, maintaining a 
steady distance like driving two chevrons in front. ‘I wish you 
the best of luck with your book,’ he said shaking her hand with 
a bright finality, he has already been more than generous with 
his time and would like to hurry her along. There was another 
143 


PAGE 152:
Aifric Campbell 
woman waiting for him, he could already see the lowlight of his 
purring screen. He closed the door firmly on the evening. Dana 
waved through the streaked window, turning her head to keep 
him in her departing view but Jay had already started walking 
quickly westwards to Edwardes Square, gripped by an 
unexpected and definite anticipation. 
144 


PAGE 153:
PART TWO 
The end is where we start from 


PAGE 154:


PAGE 155:
• FOURTEEN * 
At 8.47 am, Jay stood in his first floor study considering the 
emergence of a still dull day framed in the window. At the 
northern boundary of Edwardes Square the slate roofs of tall 
villas cut into the dirty skyline. Grey sodden grass was just 
visible through the garden railings and on the street below, a 
parking attendant smoothed a clamping notice to the 
windscreen of a car in the residents’ parking bay and stood back 
rubbing her hands under a lacklustre drizzle. 
Jay checked his watch again: Cora was now forty-eight 
minutes late for her appointment. The possibility that she 
might never come back had reasserted itself at exactly 3.35 am 
while he was putting the finishing touches to her story. He had 
stepped out of a cab just after midnight and sprinted up the 
stairs, closing his thoughts on the evening with Dana. As he 
wrote, he could feel Cora’s strength ebbing away and he 
remembered a dying fox he had found the previous year on the 
eastern side of the square, how he’d felt its heartbeat slow 
under a moonlit sky, blood trickling through its bared teeth as 
the fur cooled on the roadside, how the body seemed unmarked 
until his prodding shoe revealed the shattered skull. 
Cora’s case was now predictable within a narrow range of 
possible outcomes. There was still an outside chance that she 
would show up late to contaminate his story, but Jay didn’t 
really believe this would happen. In fact, he was convinced that 
his client had reached the limits of her endurance and that 
147 


PAGE 156:
Aifric Campbell 
yesterday’s sudden flight confirmed she might be on the verge 
of any desperate act. Larry would be home in less than forty- 
eight hours, a fact of which Cora would now only be dimly 
aware. He could find anything when he turned the key in the 
door. Perhaps, Jay mused, watching the parking attendant 
disappear round the corner, reality will meet fiction in a slow 
melting waltz; perhaps Cora will follow the precise trajectory 
that he had outlined in her story, where all perspective 
evaporates, where past overwhelms present and devours the 
future. 
Jay smiled, a broad full stretch of the lips. Even after all 
these years, it was still reassuring to be correct in a client 
diagnosis and prognosis, it was like the satisfying exercise of a 
skill, the steady defeating serve. Although he knew it could 
often be far more enlightening to be proved wrong. Popper’s 
objection to psychoanalysis had been that it was not predictive, 
that the scale of its grand ambition as a theory to account for 
human behaviour was in fact its Achilles heel, so he relegated it 
to the status of a pre-science, reluctantly conceding that it 
might generate some interesting observations, but that it 
would not be a science until its theories were falsifiable. 
Robert, of course, could not even manage this grudging 
generosity. Allow me to introduce my younger brother to your 
unconscious,’ he’d joked to a colleague on the stairs at Dodd 
Hall, his face flushed after the climb to his third floor office. An 
emaciated senior professor with a coffee stain on his shirt 
offered Jay a damp hand and an unmistakable sneer while 
Robert’s high-pitched giggle reverberated in the airless 
stairwell. Jay gripped the metal banister as if to wrench it from 
the concrete steps and hurl it through the casement windows, 
but the philosophers were already huddled over some 
mathematical scribble that the lecturer had pulled from his 
pocket. Jay composed himself and looked out the window to the 
148 


PAGE 157:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
edge of the quadrangle, beyond the half-moon fountain and the 
low stone balustrade into a blank haze that consumed the 
afternoon over west LA. 
Earlier that morning, as they bounced along Sepulveda, Jay 
had announced to his brother that he’d claimed Wittgenstein as 
his hero. ‘He wasn’t smart enough,’ said Robert, ‘he didn’t 
believe in general theory.’ He ran a finger inside his grimy 
collar, swerving as he switched lanes. A cab overtook them on 
the nearside, horn blaring. Jay turned to the window but Robert 
had already launched into a detailed account of the philoso¬ 
pher’s shortcomings without waiting for further elucidation. 
The car rattled over the bumps, up ahead was a line of 
stationary traffic at the Wilshire exit. Jay lowered the window, 
let the freeway roar drown out his brother’s voice. It was his 
final term at Berkeley and he had decided to align himself with 
Wittgenstein precisely because he was concerned with all the 
stuff that didn’t make sense. Here was a philosopher who 
understood that the really important mysteries were the non¬ 
facts, the non-verifiables, like art or God or beauty. Unlike the 
Vienna Circle who struggled to impose a structure on a chaotic 
world, to make it less frightening, dividing it up into the 
meaningful and the nonsensical, pretending that vast tracts did 
not exist. They railed against language, horrified by its 
sprawling disarray, and scuttled off to formulate artificial 
versions like Esperanto, elaborate mutations that were stripped 
of torturous nuance and unaccountable ambiguity. 
But Wittgenstein - like Freud - was fascinated by the 
unsayable, the subtext that emerges underneath the articu¬ 
lated. He was also, in Jay’s opinion, the first person of 
consequence to appreciate the cultural significance of psycho¬ 
analysis, although his curiosity was repeatedly mistaken for 
endorsement. However, as Jay had explained in his first book: 
149 


PAGE 158:
Aifric Campbell 
Wittgenstein’s position on Freud was absolutely clear: psycho¬ 
analysis was based on myth. It was not scientific. Its power lay 
in the fact that it provided explanations which people were 
prepared to accept. He was therefore the first to identify the 
fundamental and enduring appeal of psychoanalysis and the 
first to predict the magnitude of its cultural impact. 
Jay believed that what had so intrigued Wittgenstein was 
the realisation that Freud had stumbled upon a different way of 
speaking, a means of communicating the inexpressible that is 
the secret gift of the artist. When they begged him to attend a 
meeting, he stood up and read Tagore aloud while the Vienna 
Circle worshipped nervously at his feet, misinterpreting his 
position. They had misread the code in the last line of 
Tractatus: ‘What we cannot speak of we must pass over in 
silence’, thinking that this was an echo of their manifesto 
instead of realising this was a signpost to the schism. They 
built an island of rationality as a defence against the threat¬ 
ening human mystery erupting all around them and even as 
they fled across the Atlantic, they vowed that philosophy would 
be the handmaiden of science. 
Jay looked again at the northern approach to the square but 
there was no sign of Cora. A man in a dark wool coat stopped in 
the middle of the road and stared at the clamping notice on the 
windscreen. He stepped back, swivelling his head and moved to 
the kerbside checking for markings. The parking attendant 
appeared out of nowhere and paused by the car. The man 
straightened up and snatched at the ticket. She pointed to the 
residents’ parking notice nailed to the railings and he moved 
closer, studied it. He turned round, speaking, but she had 
already disappeared from view. 
Jay moved from the window back to his desk and ran a 
1 50 


PAGE 159:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
congratulatory hand across the manuscript where Cora lay 
safely embalmed on the page. In the end, he had known exactly 
what to do and had not faltered in the precise arrangement of 
her story into the most exquisite composition. At 4,837 words 
it was the perfect centrepiece for his collection. 
CORA - FRAGMENT OF AN ANALYSIS OF 
A CASE OF CHILDLESSNESS 
J. Merritt 
Jay was immensely pleased at his choice of title, intended as an 
ironic homage to Freud, a sly sideswipe at his infamous case 
history. He reached up to the bookcase above his desk and 
pulled out volume sixteen of The Standard Edition of the 
Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud and flicked the pages until 
he found ‘Dora: An Analysis of a Case of Hysteria’. Although 
the similarities between J. Merritt’s story and Freud’s Dora 
were largely superficial, they guaranteed an excited response 
from the critics who seized upon such minutiae to advertise 
their own erudition. Both cases had been abruptly terminated 
after three months and two dreams. Both patients had provided 
the inspiration for their analyst’s piece de resistance and both had 
fled when the lid was forced open on their repression. 
Freud had dithered about the publication of Dora’s case for 
a full four years. You could almost hear the man squirm as he 
<• 
wrote, his nervous prefatory remarks contained a litany of 
warnings for the uninitiated, a parade of disclaimers excusing 
his invasion of privacy, as he tried to assert the moral rights of 
exposing an eighteen-year-old girl spread-eagled to the world. 
The delay was usually attributed to stage fright at his unautho¬ 
rised disclosure and mistrust of the public attitude to the 
sexually explicit nature of the case. But Jay knew better: Freud 
was tormented by the suspicion that he had created a 
l 5 l 


PAGE 160:
Aifric Campbell 
monumental work of fiction that had no scientific basis 
whatsoever. Dora’s case had little to do with her and everything 
to do with his own unresolved phantasies. Jay turned the 
yellowing pages, imagined Dora lying on the couch, her pale 
fingertips exploring her beloved jewel case while Freud sat all 
aquiver, chewing on his feverish cigar as he watched her steady 
hand stroke up and down in her lap. She sighed and he thrust 
his lurid interpretations upon her - a grotesque miscalculation, 
for Dora fled, horrified, leaving him to stare at the empty 
couch. And because she had the temerity to reject him, he 
turned his avenging pen upon his cruel muse, offered Dora up 
as a living demonstration of his science, shoe-horned into a 
theory that was already written. It was all in the interests of 
science, Freud insisted, clutching his trembling pen, walled in 
his room, tormented by the lingering trace of her scent. 
Jay snapped the book shut and returned it to the shelf. He 
was dismissive of the revisionist commentators who suggested 
that Dora was a casualty of analysis. Like most patients, she 
knew the solution to her own misery but simply failed to trust 
her instinct. In all his years of practice, Jay had been both 
astounded by his clients' insight and dismayed by their lack of 
courage. Early on in his career, he realised that he would always 
find it difficult to wholeheartedly embrace the therapeutic 
imperative to help. It was an impossible Hippocratic position. 
Yesterday when he watched Cora stumble in the pelting rain, 
he had remembered the plaintive cry of a classmate from all 
those years ago: ‘How can you let a patient go in such pain?’ 
It was 1970 at the San Francisco School of Psychoanalysis 
and the voice of Angeline, who had a penchant for getting 
mired in hypotheticals, like the ethics of the fifty-minute hour 
and the sanctity of its boundaries. ‘Say if a patient is on the 
verge of losing it completely?’ she exclaimed to the class, 
waving her bangled hands. ‘Say if a patient is unsafe, say if they 
152 


PAGE 161:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
are a danger to themselves?’ 
Metzling surveyed the group, flexed a sandalled foot where a 
yellow rind of skin bulged over an ingrown toenail. 
‘Let them go,’ said Jay. ‘It is the transaction.’ 
‘Well, I know there’s just no way I could do that,’ said 
Angeline, tossing a blaze of loose curls. 
Jay followed her down the front steps after class and they 
stood looking out over the commanding sweep of Sutter Street. 
‘Tuck your bleeding heart away,’ he said as she stepped out into 
the warm drizzle. ‘And ask yourself, for whom does your heart 
bleed? Yourself or the patient?’ He reached out and squeezed 
her shoulder with a spontaneous condescension. He could hear 
the distant rumble of a cable car. A sparkle of silver droplets 
netted on her frizzy hair and she raised the tip of her tiny nose, 
contemplating his hand with a private smile that Jay completely 
failed to de-code. 
The cloud cleared, she covered his hand with an unspoken 
invitation and they leaned into the breathless gradient, up into 
the damp afternoon, through Lower Haights towards Buena 
Vista Park. It was the tail end of the summer of love and Jay was 
expecting joss stick sex, candle grease congealed along the 
windowsills, so he was taken by surprise when Angeline 
kneeled before him in the dense shade of the Monterey pines 
and unbuttoned his fly to find his willing cock which she 
sucked efficiently. Jay understood that she wanted something 
more, so he gathered up her voluminous hair and yanked it so 
hard that the skin of her temples webbed. He jammed her head 
against his groin and ejaculated deep down in her throat. 
Afterwards, he let her slump to the scented forest floor gasping 
for air, where she stroked his punishing hand. 
Angeline was silent but apparently enthusiastic, because she 
led him homewards along Ashbury, stopping briefly to admire 
the Dead House. He followed her up a side street stair into the 
153 


PAGE 162:
Aifric Campbell 
cramped disarray of a small room whose centrepiece was a 
mattress screened by a muslin curtain that diffused the 
sunlight even as it hit the window. She slipped her shirt off and 
lifted his palm to her breast, a slight swelling with no more 
substance than his own. He could feel the soft beat of heart on 
breastbone as she pressed into his touch. Pulling back, she 
wriggled out of her jeans and knelt on the mattress, bent 
double and gracelessly offered up her thin white ass. But Jay 
was aggrieved to find events so orchestrated, to find himself so 
objectified - this was unfamiliar territory and he felt that the 
outcome might be falling short of everyone’s expectations. She 
swung her face sideways as he fumbled with her wetness and it 
seemed to Jay that she was mocking him with her determined 
submission, so he grabbed a bottle of massage oil and poured it 
over her pale cheeks as if smoothing her slithery compliance 
could calm the fury rising within him. His hands slid over the 
greased bone of her hips, the narrow dimensions of a small 
child that he could have picked up and hurled across the room. 
Jay’s sudden penetration took Angeline unawares and when he 
thrust even deeper into her asshole, she cried out in pain. His 
left hand twisted a fistful of her hair and he bent a sharp elbow 
across the back of her neck, he was pinning her to the pillow 
and swallowing hard on a lurch of nausea, consumed by a 
simultaneous coming and a revulsion at the thought of her shit 
on his cock. 
He wrenched free and kneeled back on the mattress while 
she lay bunched on her side. ‘There’s blood,’ she murmured, 
her finger tracing red spots on the grubby sheet. He stood up, 
jeans pooled at his ankles. ‘You need to get in touch with your 
anger. Jay, she said propping her head on a folded arm. He 
stared down at her bed-bound smirk and realised with a jolt 
that Angeline was suffused with a pink-cheeked vindication, a 
gloating pride, for she had bared his ugly soul and Jay had 
154 


PAGE 163:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
revelled in the liberating joy of cruelty. She had released the 
beast lurking within him - it was a carefully planned assault, 
this was her party trick for men who needed teaching a lesson 
about their true nature. 
‘You’re a textbook case/ she said and it was all Jay could do 
to keep his shaking hands away from her neck. But he had the 
sense to back away, to hoist his trousers and flee, it was a 
moment of revelation he would never forget, as well as his first 
and last experiment with anal sex, and the shrill memory of 
that afternoon would never leave him. 
Jay reached across the desk for Cora’s casebook, turned to a 
new blank page and wrote: 
10th/ heMdCM/ 
Cora/ did/ wot attend/ 
He had not sheltered her from the truth but the question 
now was whether or not she would survive it. It seemed 
entirely appropriate that the completion of his story might 
coincide with Cora’s permanent disappearance from his safe 
space. Jay had no further requirement for her presence and it 
would be naturally fortuitous not to have to endure the tedious 
process of weaning her off. He had always felt that terminations 
are sentimentalised in his business and that analysts romanti¬ 
cise the privilege of invading another’s life. Destiny, he 
reflected, putting down his pen, is where we place our dreams 
when we have decided to abdicate responsibility, when we 
choose instead to delegate our welfare to others. 
On his last day at the San Francisco School of Psycho¬ 
analysis, Metzling shook Jay’s hand and pressed a folded page 
into his palm. Jay read the handwritten quote as he walked 
along Sutter for the last time. 
155 


PAGE 164:
Aifric Campbell 
Whoever has eyes to see and ears to hear will be persuaded 
that mortals can hide no secret. He whose lips are silent speaks 
with his fingertips; betrayal threatens from every pore. That’s 
why the task of making conscious the most hidden business of 
the soul can certainly be resolved. 
He smiled into the sudden mist chill and dropped the 
crumpled paper in the gutter. 
156 


PAGE 165:
• FIFTEEN * 
The intercom cut through the silence. Jay stepped into the 
landing and glared down at the front door. The buzzer blared 
again. Exasperated, he hurried down the stairs. It seemed he 
had miscalculated and would have to answer, for Cora could 
remain on the step indefinitely, jabbing at the bell. He would 
invite her into the hallway, arrange another session and dispose 
of her, he thought as he turned the latch. 
‘Thank you for last night,' said Dana, nudging a bouquet of 
lilies towards him. ‘I’m just on my way to the airport. I hope I 
haven’t called at a bad time.’ 
‘Not at all,’ he said, with a smile of relief. 
‘You sure?’ 
‘My 8 am appointment has turned out to be a no show.’ 
Dana smelled of outdoors and the vague trace of some 
androgynous scent. A long thin crimson scarf was coiled tightly 
around her neck, highlighting the translucence of her skin. She 
dropped her travel bag in the hallway and Jay directed her 
straight ahead, down three steps into the breakfast room, an 
excavated semi-basement with a maple floor and a blaze of 
pinprick spotlights glinting off an oversized stainless steel hob. 
Dana accepted his offer of coffee, her eyes roving around the 
room, and he wondered if in fact she had come with some 
unfinished business. 
‘I didn’t realise this was where you lived,’ she said. ‘I mean, 
I thought it was a clinic or something. Is this where you see all 
157 


PAGE 166:
Aifric Campbell 
your patients?’ 
‘I find it more conducive here. The suggestion of home is 
very powerful to a client, whether they realise it or not. They 
are entering the analyst’s space. It’s a big opening statement, a 
gesture of trust.’ 
‘Is it safe?' 
‘For the analyst or the client?’ 
Pink thumbprints of cold glow were fading into her pale 
skin and the overwhelming impression was of appetite, a 
radiant vividness as if the room could barely contain her. He 
filled the half sink and placed the lilies in the water, holding his 
breath against the stinking perfume. 
‘So do you get a lot of very disturbed people?’ 
‘I have treated unmedicated psychotics, if that’s what you 
mean. But I’ve never been interested in the extremities of 
personality disorder.’ 
‘I thought that sort of work would be fascinating.’ 
There are analysts who argue that psychotherapy is useful 
for psychosis, but there’s no consistent evidence to support this 
view. It’s based on the fallacious premise that understanding 
what drives an individual to commit an evil act is both possible 
and useful.’ He turned to the countertop and slashed the coffee 
carton with the flat blade of a knife. 
‘Take the Manson murders, for example. It wasn’t far from 
where Robert lived, you know, La Cienaga Boulevard, in 
Benedict Canyon. I remember well how a psychologist stood up 
in court and tried to explain why a young woman could stab 
another pregnant woman to death, oblivious to the eight- 
month-old foetus beating inside her.’ He turned back to face 
her, leaning against the counter and folding his arms. ‘Caligula, 
Mengele, Manson, Bundy, Columbine — these are horrors that 
linger in the public imagination. But they are not especially 
informative. They tell us nothing we can’t guess at.’ 
158 


PAGE 167:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
Dana raised her chin. So finely and precisely angled, he 
thought. The whites of her eyes oddly clear as a child’s. ‘In 
1924,’ he continued, ‘Freud was invited to Chicago to advise on 
Leopold and Loeb, the notorious murderers. He declined on the 
grounds of ill health, but I think he had identified even then 
that there are certain conditions that are untreatable. He knew 
there was nothing of real interest or value to find. So much talk 
and time wasted trying to understand the fine print of human 
behaviour, our deepest fears and longings. But we still seek out 
the aberrations, the serial killers, the child murderers, we still 
crave the monster in our midst to make us feel better. The 
moral high ground is a wonderfully inviting vantage point, 
don’t you think?’ 
‘Are you saying there is nothing that can be done?’ 
‘On the contrary, Dana. That is exactly what medication is 
for - the most expedient, maybe the only way to manage 
dangerous cases. We learn nothing from a study of true 
insanity, at least nothing very useful. We simply need to be able 
to identify and medicate, to prevent. In today’s world, drugs are 
the new prison. Psychiatrists remain, as they have always been, 
our jailers, the buffer zone between polite society and those 
who tear their hair out in the asylum. They maintain our 
dialogue with that section of the community whom we would 
prefer to incarcerate or eliminate. The great social benefit of 
medication is that we can keep dormant what we are too 
✓ 
squeamish to kill. And of course it’s cheaper to drug people 
than to lock them up - it also makes us feel civilised and liberal.’ 
Dana tugged at her scarf and began to slowly unwind the 
long coils of knitted silk until two uneven lengths dangled like 
scarlet rope from her neck. 
‘Of course, we’re talking here about a tiny percentage of the 
population,’ Jay added, placing two small china mugs on the 
table. Apparently the urgent issue of the day is the alarming 
159 


PAGE 168:
Aifric Campbell 
deterioration in the mental health of the masses.’ 
‘You don’t agree?’ 
‘Insanity was once rather engagingly defined as not being 
able to find anyone who could put up with you. It was 
Wittgenstein who suggested that madness should not be 
treated as an illness at all. He asked why it shouldn’t be seen as 
a sudden change of character.’ Indeed, Jay reflected, turning 
back to the counter, his most intuitive clients whose capacity 
for rational thought hadn't been completely submerged by their 
neuroses, eventually stumbled upon this realisation 
themselves. For years they would lie buried under the weight of 
their own pathology, transfixed by the frigid stalactites of 
memory, until one day they followed a tiny flicker of light and 
stumbled out of their cave into the sun, finally seeing that their 
madness, their psychological turbulence was simply rooted in a 
certain way of viewing themselves. 
‘We insist that everyone should be in harmony with our 
expectations,’ he continued. ‘Anything that we cannot stand, 
we expect to be eliminated. The moody teenager is put on 
Prozac, a child that is too exuberant and exhausts its parents 
with an excess of energy is diagnosed with Attention Deficit 
Disorder and prescribed Ritalin. We medicate as our intoler¬ 
ance grows.’ 
‘So you don’t believe in drug therapy?’ 
‘Strictly speaking the question is not how to get cured, but 
how to live. That was how Conrad so aptly described it a 
hundred years ago. The real problem, Dana, is our faltering 
endurance, our loss of stamina. It is as if the human race is 
losing muscle tone. We expect not to have to suffer distress. 
This is what is interesting - our growing intolerance of the pain 
involved in the actual business of living.’ 
‘You mean we’re becoming soft?’ 
‘Let me give you an example,’ he said, pouring coffee into 
160 


PAGE 169:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
Dana’s mug as she lowered herself into a chair. 'A woman, let’s 
call her Lisa, comes to my practice. Lisa is upset, anxious, she 
can’t concentrate, she is underperforming at work. For no 
apparent reason, she thinks. Until, slowly over the following 
weeks, we uncover her story - for there is always a story - of a 
terminal breakdown in Lisa’s relationship with her mother, 
whom she cut out of her life many years ago. Now the mother 
has died, depriving Lisa of what she has been waiting for all her 
life: the chance of a grand reconciliation. This is what has been 
keeping my client going, despite her denials. She is distraught 
with guilt, mourning the lost opportunity to correct the 
mothering experience that has left her wanting all her life. “I 
can’t bear the pain,” she says to me. “I can’t eat, I can’t sleep. I 
think I’m losing it.” Lisa wants me to make the pain go away, 
she doesn't want to face up to the consequences of a decision 
made years ago in anger to which she stubbornly adhered. She 
does not want to be the hard-hearted daughter who refused to 
visit her mother on her deathbed; she does not want to see 
herself as the person she has become. So, I tell Lisa that the 
only resolution is to come to terms with her past, to accept the 
guilt. To grow up. Her real fear is that she has lost her mother 
forever. I tell her she can create a positive maternal image, 
repair her internal mother if you like. But Lisa doesn’t have the 
stomach for this, it will take too long, she wants the quick fix 
that Prozac will give. And I am not interested in talking to the 
drug.’ 
Dana leaned her chin into the folded angle of her wrist, she 
was still and captive, framed in his open palms. These were the 
moments Jay remembered, the weight and impact of each word. 
‘The real crisis is our dwindling appetite for life,’ he said 
reaching for his coffee. ‘We are fleeing from our own humanity.' 
l 6 1 


PAGE 170:
Aifric Campbell 
Dana stroked the rim of her mug. He read her studied silence as 
a signal that she wished to return to her true agenda, that he 
had only briefly managed to elbow in front of Robert’s ghost, 
that he would always be disadvantaged by the third person at 
the table. 
‘I have something you might like to see,’ he said, pushing 
back from the table to open a cabinet door below the counter. ‘I 
took it out last night with the intention of bringing it along to 
our meeting.’ He placed a red box file down on the table in 
front of her. ‘Open it,’ he urged and she leaned forwards, ran a 
caressing finger along the edge of the file with the careful touch 
of a scholar. 
Once, in the shuttered shadow of his mother's bedroom 
during the hour before she came home. Jay had lifted the flimsy 
wooden lid of her jewellery box and dipped his curious fingers 
into the soft interior. A solitary pearl rolled and knocked 
against a clip-on earring - tarnished gilt with a dull grass- 
coloured stone embedded in the centre. He undid a jiggling 
length of necklace, swung the multicoloured beads in the air. 
Groping for treasure in the lush velvet compartments, he found 
the smooth oval of a locket with a verdigrised chain that tickled 
his palm. The two halves were held together by a thread of 
eroded gold but he prised open the worn catch with the delicate 
touch of a spy, only to reveal the infuriating trace of excised 
memory, a smudge of greyish glue that had hardened where 
once a face had been. Buried underneath all of this finery, he 
eventually reached the inner core: guarded by the removable 
shelf in the concealed heart of the box was the secret of the 
Hamilton family, the hidden force that bound these random 
human elements together recorded in a folded marriage licence 
dated 23 July 1928. ‘Doris McKay and Frederic Hamilton’, the 
ink scrawl proclaimed. Underneath, he found the birth certifi¬ 
cates for Robert Merritt Hamilton and James Hamilton. 
162 


PAGE 171:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
Jay held his breath in the cricket-scream heat of the 
afternoon and cradled the mystery of family in his hands, 
wondering exactly what would be destroyed if he took a match 
and burnt the evidence, if it would be like voodoo and the 
whole structure might all fall apart, collapse and die. 
After his mother’s death Jay pared down all the paperwork 
to a tidy sheaf of legal documents and photos. He kept the 
marriage and birth certificates, prevented from throwing them 
away by a vague suspicion that it might one day be necessary to 
prove his family had ever existed. Jay used to wonder if the 
genetic configuration that had produced a prodigy like Robert 
might have had its roots in some distant ancestral brilliance, 
but he was now, in so far as he was aware, the sole surviving 
Hamilton and there would be no one left to shuffle their dutiful 
feet to his graveside. His mother’s death had marked the end of 
any opportunity to easily add to his paltry knowledge of his 
heritage as he knew nothing except her maiden name and birth 
date. 
‘Just like my aunt June,’ his mother had muttered once with 
unmistakable ferocity as they walked to church, clucking her 
lips at a young woman who bent down to check her reflection 
in a car window and Jay was stunned at the realisation that his 
mother had a beginning, an origin, that there might be others. 
‘Where?’ he asked. 
‘Colorado,’ she snapped, striding up the steps and he 
understood the subject was permanently closed and that 
although the accident of family history is an unavoidable afflic¬ 
tion, it is a completely survivable misfortune. 
A year after Robert’s murder Jay had stood outside 3840 
North Beverly Drive and decided on a thorough reorganisation 
of his past. There really was no space to accommodate family 
mementoes in his life and so he packed the documents into this 
box file and loaded everything else - his mother’s and brother’s 
163 


PAGE 172:
Aifric Campbell 
clothes, furniture and all their other possessions - onto a waste 
truck and had them driven away for disposal. 'A year is an 
eternity in real estate, Mr Hamilton,’ said the broker who had 
assessed the house and assured Jay that buyers in Beverly Hills 
were relatively crime insensitive, even after the Manson 
murders. Within a week he had produced a far-sighted couple 
who believed that 3840’s homicide association was incidental 
when it came to the location advantage and the long-term 
possibility of price appreciation, and were therefore only too 
happy to overlook a murder in the bathroom. 
Christmas 1958. It’s the only one of us all together,’ said Jay 
with an embarrassed rush that startled him like a spray of cold 
water. 
‘It’s a little out of focus,’ said Dana, peering into the black- 
and-white patch of shaved lawn where Jay, with a zealously 
cropped haircut, wearing short trousers and a short-sleeved 
shirt obediently buttoned to the neck, gripped the handlebars 
of a large-wheeled bike and squared up to the camera with a 
guarded expression. Robert grinned broadly at the lens, his 
eyes squinting into the sun. His shirt was open at the neck so 
that the line of his undershirt was just visible. A thin covering 
of dark hair lay slack against his skull; thick-framed glasses 
dominated the white face, his chin and upper lips shadowed by 
an imperfect shave that had left its trace in what looked like a 
nick underneath his nose. ‘The looks are from your mother’s 
side,’ she said, tilting the photo under the light, taking in the 
pale oval faces, the dark hair, the narrow-shouldered brittle¬ 
ness, although Jay, at ten years old, was already looking like the 
next generation: broader, heavier and better-equipped, a 
presence that would prove more enduring. 
His mother stood in between her sons but not equidistant, 
164 


PAGE 173:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
her full-skirted dress spattered with a chaotic floral pattern. 
She had just smoothed Robert’s shorn sideburns and flecked a 
dust speck from his collar with the grooming possession of a 
wife. She was looking not at the camera but sideways, in proud 
contemplation of her eldest son. Her arm had slipped through 
Robert’s, one hand resting on his shirtsleeve. She couldn’t be 
near him without touching, as if his escape from her uterine 
clutch had been premature. Jay stood like an uninvited guest in 
the space she had created on her other side, like an extra in the 
frame on his big-wheeled bike. 
When he finally took his last backward glance at Stockton, 
he remembered how he’d searched for a route out of there ever 
since he was a child, a westward dash that would follow the 
waterway to the ocean, his only romantic indulgence. 
Unreproachful, his mother had done her time and didn’t 
abandon Jay until the appropriate juncture, which she deemed 
to be the day after he graduated from high school on 23 June 
1966. Cuffed and collared in a new cocoa blouse, she gave him 
$93 and a shoulder pat, her gloved hand tucking a curl under 
her white pillbox as she boarded a silver Greyhound for LA. Jay 
followed her progress down to the middle of the bus where she 
settled in a window seat behind glass that was smeared with a 
heavy interstate dust. She sat there waving a radiant goodbye, 
even blew Jay an extravagant kiss, so delighted was she to be 
leaving after all that interminable waiting, finally unshackled 
from the nail-biting tedium of counting the months till it 
seemed acceptable to make the move. When the bus pulled 
away in a cloud of exhaust. Jay waited for a quiet rage to wash 
over him, for he knew his mother didn’t really care if she never 
set eyes on her youngest son again. Instead, he felt cleansed of 
the humiliation of being born at all, relieved that she no longer 
felt compelled to stay put against her will. 
As the bus receded into the lightening horizon, Jay 
165 


PAGE 174:
Aifric Campbell 
understood that he was the recipient of an inadequate 
mothering and must simply repair that fault like he would 
change a bike tyre. Over the years, he had generously shared 
this valuable insight with his clients, convincing at least some 
of them that a lack of motherlove need not in fact be an impedi¬ 
ment at all. But it was becoming increasingly difficult to get 
clients to embrace this position for lately the industry of 
therapy has raised the bar and overcomplicated the issue. 
Having a mother is not the simple business it was once thought 
to be: any rationing of love and affection, the slightest 
childhood trauma and his clients expect to teeter on the brink 
of a possible disintegration, a gaping festering loss that they 
will schlep around with them for the rest of their lives. 
Rental prices kept his mother on the northern periphery of 
LA and she settled in Van Nuys, thirty square miles of farmland 
in the San Fernando Valley that was exploding into suburbia in 
the mid-sixties. A Spanish-style duplex near the railroad tracks 
just above Saticoy and Woodman and half an hour’s drive from 
Robert. With dutiful regularity she wrote to Jay every Monday, 
telling him how the move had been a seamless transition, how 
Robert took her every month to Nate ’n’ Al’s deli on North 
Beverly Drive for hand-pressed potato cakes. A long way from 
Stockton’, she exclaimed, and Jay could see her installed in one 
of the Naughahyde booths, where waitresses in pink pinstripes 
showered her with attention. In the afternoon, Robert ferried 
her the scenic route home through Beverly Hills, past Shirley 
Temple’s house on Sunset, down a line of jacarandas on Palm 
Drive where Marilyn lived with DiMaggio, before finally 
beginning the slow ascent up through Coldwater Canyon. 
Robert sat in the backyard under the alder reading a mathemat¬ 
ical journal and tucking into some pastries his mother had 
secreted in her handbag, he was busy with Universal Grammar 
and a grand vision that completely distracted. She sipped tea, 
166 


PAGE 175:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
tugged at clusters of needlegrass that poked through cracks in 
the rocks, watching over her son as the afternoon sun sank 
down behind the bush-covered foothills and the sky unrolled 
its grey shade over the invisible city. 
When she died, Jay had been astonished to find a drawerful 
of photos in her apartment, so much pictorial evidence of 
outings with Robert - little day trips where she posed outside 
the homes of the stars, or leaned against the bumper of his 
Mustang, or looked through a penny telescope on the Santa 
Monica pier. There was an entire set taken on that evening in 
September ’68 when Jay had made up a rare threesome for a 
visit to the Anheuser Busch Gardens in Van Nuys. The air 
reeked of warm beer and doughnuts and the park rang with the 
shriek of tropical birds that squawked and dive-bombed all 
around them. He was shocked to see his mother so carefree on 
a red bumper car, clutching her headscarf and laughing like a 
girl while Robert wrenched at the steering wheel. From a small 
curved footbridge Jay monitored their covered gondola ride 
along the waterways, past gushing fountains and waterfalls 
spilling out over the rocks, over to the brewery where you could 
look in and see the Budweiser being brewed. That same night 
his mother discovered an extraordinary affection for the parrots 
that landed easily on her wrist to peck at the seeds in her 
cupped palm. 
Three months later Jay arrived at Van Nuys on Christmas 
Day to find a veiled domed cage on the table. ‘It will live for 
fifty years,’ Robert announced with a flourish, whipping off the 
cover to reveal a large African grey who shuffled its black claws 
along a wooden perch, shallow eyes like dials, lifeless and 
unblinking. 
‘Oh, he's just wonderful,’ his mother cried and the parrot 
cocked his blunt head to one side as if he recognised her voice. 
‘What will I call him?’ 
167 


PAGE 176:
Aifric Campbell 
‘He’s already got a name,’ Robert pointed to a small ceramic 
disk at the top of the cage. 
‘Peter,’ said Jay, stepping closer. The bird flapped hysteri¬ 
cally, feathers whirling to the floor. 
‘He doesn’t like you,’ said his mother. ‘He knows you don't 
like him.’ Peter nodded, twitched a long grey tail with a crimson 
splash at the vent. 
‘African greys sometimes pluck out their feathers when 
they’re bored,’ warned Robert reading aloud from a leaflet. 
Peter settled on his perch, squeezing a contemptuous dropping 
while he fixed a malevolent eye on Jay. 
‘You need to get safe toys for his cage. Mom,’ Robert tapped 
the instructions. ‘Parrots can be strangled by some of the ropes 
they like to swing on.’ 
Peter never demonstrated any interest in coherent speech 
but he thrived in Van Nuys and became a regular mention in 
her letters to Jay, which had, by the late ’60s, become more 
infrequent. And although he didn’t live to be fifty, he did 
outlast Robert by a few months, during which time he seemed a 
rare and blessed comfort to their mother. But late in 1971, 
Southern California was ravaged by Exotic Newcastle Disease, 
a fatal virus that travelled on shoes and clothing and millions of 
demented birds succumbed to tremors and anorexia before 
thudding to the ground, a green discharge leaking from their 
dead eyes. It was like the visitation of a great plague, you could 
drive along the valley and see rotting carcasses on the freeway. 
Jay’s mother stopped leaving Peter’s cage out on the balcony 
where he was visible to passers-by, she even tried to keep him 
quiet by draping a sheet over him, but he was having none of it 
and squawked his noisy protest, a blood curdling and 
unmistakably avian shriek that eventually brought the 
Department of Agriculture to her front door. 
I m sorry ma’am, African greys are carriers,’ said the 
168 


PAGE 177:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
official, showing her their compulsory permits. ‘It’s a statewide 
euthanasia programme. The only way to protect the fowl, the 
foodstuffs,’ and he took out a tank of carbon monoxide, a 
plastic bag and a rubber hose. ‘Twelve million birds,’ he sighed, 
‘sixty-five million dollars,’ and stuffed Peter into the bag and 
gassed him while her fist stifled a scream. 
Dana reached into the box file for the second black-and-white 
photo. 
‘If you look at the back,’ said Jay, ‘you’ll see it was taken in 
February 1971, a month before he died. I never found out who 
took it or why it was developed in large format.’ 
Robert’s three-quarter profile was looking off-camera with a 
lingering smile of recognition, his brow furrowed in 
amusement. His lips parted to reveal two large symmetrical 
teeth, he had just been or was about to speak, it had the look of 
a witty remark delivered to someone standing to the side. 
Clearly in transit, he stood in an open doorway, an exit of some 
sorts, the slim striped tie, the narrow jacket lapels, the thinness 
of his upper lip mitigated by the fullness of his smile - Robert 
had his mother’s unfortunate labial arrangement which she 
tried to conceal with a lipsticked cupid’s bow. 
‘Funny the little things you remember,’ said Jay, ‘For 
example, the fact that the autopsy report didn’t say that Robert 
always wore glasses. “The eyes are brown,”’ he quoted, ‘“the 
pupils are round and equal measuring 0.4 cm in diameter.’” 
‘Pupil measurement can be an indicator of trauma to the 
head,’ Dana said, without looking up. ‘Some blow that might 
not have left any visible sign,’ and Jay was reminded of how 
assiduously she researched and how hard she worked at over¬ 
compensating. A fervent believer in Einstein’s little quip about 
genius and perspiration, she reached out for what was beyond 
169 


PAGE 178:
Aifric Campbell 
her grasp, like a child mesmerised by the red flame, inching 
closer until, with a soundless air rush, she was consumed by 
fire. 
'I think he’s saying something. What a pity we don’t know 
who took it,’ she said, as if the photo was a clue, as if Robert 
could be looking into the off-camera face of his murderer. ‘He 
looks relaxed, happy. How sad,’ she sighed, as if hers was a 
personal distress and Jay felt the press of irritation, how dare 
she claim a posthumous intimacy while flexing her biogra¬ 
pher’s claws to dismember the dead. 
‘His skin was exceptionally pale,’ said Jay, caressing his own 
stubble-less jaw. ‘Library white.’ It was a soft indoor pastiness, 
with bands of pigmentation marking his wrist, hands, face and 
neck, some unavoidable exposure to the elements. The lighting 
arrangement in the picture flattered Robert with an overexpo¬ 
sure and bleached out the fleshy folds that had begun to 
advance over the rim of his collar, whitening what would 
undoubtedly have been a less than pristine shirt, greyed from 
overuse. He had always been sloppy about bathing, there were 
occasions when Jay had to mouth-breathe against his body 
odour in the baking car. But Robert shrugged off his 
complaints, as if time squandered on such inessentials was 
wasted, as if genius cannot be expected to wash. Jay looked 
away from the photo and his brother’s grinning face and 
thought how we are supposed, in the end, to forgive the dead 
their lapses in personal hygiene. 
So the official cause of death was asphyxia?’ 
Due to strangulation by ligature,’ said Jay, carrying the 
coffee cups over to the sink. ‘There was nothing in the autopsy 
to mark him out as particularly unusual. The physical charac¬ 
teristics fitted the profile of strangulation.' 
170 


PAGE 179:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
The Medical Examiner at the scene had explained that the 
pressure of the ligature around Robert’s neck constricted the 
trachea, occluding the jugular vein and the carotid artery. 
Breathing became impossible and Robert could have drifted 
into unconsciousness within three minutes. It would have 
taken maybe ten for him to die. The corpse didn’t yield 
anything fruitful. All that Dr Herrera found out at the post 
mortem was less than useless in the investigation. 
‘There was a mark on his leg,’ said Dana. 
‘How did you know that?’ said Jay, swinging around to face 
her at the table. 
‘“The lower extremities are unremarkable,’” she began to 
quote nervously, ‘ “except for an abrasion on the right anterior 
femoral area which could correspond to a rug or a corduroy 
type of pattern somewhat related to this type of shape.” ’ 
Her right hand moved up to stroke her shoulder; he could 
see a light down of hair below her earlobe, a throbbing pulse at 
her temple. ‘I'm sorry,’ she said, ‘I meant to tell you last night 
but—’ she pursed her lips, straightened up in her chair. ‘I did 
actually see the autopsy a few weeks ago. When I went to visit 
the LAPD.’ 
Jay turned away from the table, banging his knee against the 
handle of a floor-level cupboard, suddenly light-headed. He 
looked down at a patch of spilled coffee grains on the counter 
and swept them aside into the sink. The steel bowl seemed to 
glare up at him. 
‘They just read out a little from the report,' she said from 
behind him. ‘I mean I just - I wanted to find out about the 
procedure for the reopening of old cases. I don’t know if you’ve 
read about the Cold Case Unit that’s been set up recently in 
LA?’ 
Jay shook his head, set his mouth to a tight horizontal in an 
effort to steady the squeeze of his heart. Pushing the cafetiere 
l 71 


PAGE 180:
Aifric Campbell 
to one side he picked up the knife and turned around to face 
her, blinking his quiet disbelief at her seated form. 
There are more than six thousand unsolved homicides in 
LA going back to the 1960s,' she said, her voice quick and 
earnest. And there’s lots of pressure for a clear up, it’s become 
a real political issue. The Cold Case Unit is mostly driven by 
technology. You know, processing old crime scene evidence, 
fingerprints, DNA, that kind of thing. It’s a slow business. But 
if they get a match, the case can be re-investigated.’ 
Jay put the knife back on the counter and sat down at the 
table. ‘My dear,’ he said, 'do you know of a reason why anyone 
would want to reopen Robert’s case?’ 
‘Well,’ she spread her hands flat in front of her and then, 
taking a deep breath, announced with thinly disguised anticipa¬ 
tion, ‘I found something interesting in the archives at UCLA.' 
She reached into the file and pulled out two stapled pages 
marked with a red tag. Jay recognised the neat slope of his 
brother’s handwriting, the oversized capital letters and moved 
to take the photocopy but Dana held firm. ‘It’s a letter Robert 
wrote when he was just twenty-three, but never sent,’ she said. 
‘It’s addressed to a coast guard base at Tongue Point, Oregon,’ 
she added and began to read aloud in a clear and practised 
voice. 
“‘April 19 1953. 
Dear Bob, Thanks for your Christmas card. It was the 
swishiest I received. I ought to explain why it’s taken until 
now for me to reply. 
I’ve had, you know, a little excitement. I was beaten and 
robbed by a hitchhiker. Not only was I clobbered profession¬ 
ally (the man - a negro - had been, he said, a boxer), he beat 
my head against the ground and strangled me unconscious. 
What an interesting experience, so rare in these tame 
172 


PAGE 181:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
days. I kept thinking; too bad I shall not live to relate it, but 
then I’ve passed my prime. When I awoke it was with the - 
impression of having dreamt a real thriller-killer. Then I 
opened my eyes and found myself lying in what might 
imaginatively have been called a pool of blood. The man had 
taken my wristwatch, ring, automobile & what is more 
crucial a briefcase containing my organ shoes. 
They caught him in Bakersfield with all the loot except, 
damn it, my organ shoes and he is now residing in Alameda 
County Jail. And Bob, you should hear the lurid story he 
told the police! Imagine a person of my eminent 
respectability being so maligned. I'm looking forward to the 
trial, it will give me an opportunity to vindicate indignantly 
my horror. I so love being indignant. It is I suppose wicked 
of me to take such pleasure in the prospect, since the poor 
fellow is confronted with five years to life of penal 
servitude. According to his story, he thought he’d killed me. 
The scare should be sufficient punishment. Besides, I really 
ought to be grateful to the man for introducing me to the 
hitherto untasted pleasures of hospital life. 
I presented for a time a highly grotesque appearance. 
Half my head was shaved, my eye was filled with a blood 
clot, and linen thread protruded from me in unexpected 
places around the lip and chin. The doctor who sewed me 
up was a woman and an excellent seamstress. While I was 
in hospital interns would parade by in throngs admiring her 
artistry. 
They tell me I shall bear no scars. Shall I be completely 
without trophies? Have I gone thru this for nothing? 
Robert.” ’ 
‘May I?’ said Jay, reaching for the letter although what he really 
wanted to do was ransack the contents of the blue folder that 
173 


PAGE 182:
Aifric Campbell 
lay open on the table. He felt the prickle of Dana's stare as he 
scanned without reading, wondering what other posthumous 
secrets she might have uncovered. A curious thumping struck 
up in his heart, his breath was coming in shallow snatches and 
a damp chill settled on his fingertips. He thought of Robert 
coming round, choking and spluttering by the side of the road. 
Imagine, if he had died then, when Jay was only five years old, 
he’d be a barely existent memory, an outline much like their 
father was, and Jay felt a sudden pang that it didn’t happen this 
way - he would have been spared having to deal with so much. 
‘I never heard Robert talk about being a key witness in a 
trial.’ 
‘That’s because there never was any trial,’ said Dana with a 
triumphant smile. ‘The guy who tried to strangle him - 
Timothy Virgil Wright - pleaded guilty to robbery and 
attempted homicide and was sentenced to eleven years in 
Alameda County. He was released in 1962.' 
Jay thought of Timothy Virgil Wright, imagined his disbelief 
when this puny little white boy with big glasses had offered 
him a lift, he should have known then it was funny, but Robert 
would have engaged him in chat and then, when they’d stopped 
to relieve themselves on that long straight road, the boy was 
down on his knees beside him, muttering filthy suggestions, 
his bony hand brushing his thigh so T. V. Wright had to defend 
his manhood and honour, but he couldn’t stop lashing out even 
though he knew he was putting the boy within an inch of his 
life. Even when he heard the splinter of skin-covered bone he 
just kept on hitting until the boy slumped in the roadside dust 
and a gut-wrenching fear prickled over T. V. Wright and he 
grabbed at the wristwatch - the first of many mistakes - 
knowing even then that he was never getting away with this, 
the wallet engraved RMH and a brown leather satchel that 
looked like it might have something useful, but there was only 
1 74 


PAGE 183:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
a pair of soft-soled slippers. He jumped into Robert's car, petty 
thief turned avenging killer in a heartbeat and drove off to 
Bakersfield where his trembling knees made him veer into the 
centre of the road and he tried to dump the car practically in 
full view of the sheriff’s office, drawing all kinds of unwanted 
attention to himself, so the cops were there in no time at all 
and T. V. Wright was confessing before they even asked him a 
civil question, before they even found the boy ten miles back. It 
might look better, they said in between blows, if T. V. would 
talk. And so, because the truth was all he had, he told them 
how the boy had tried to touch him, how he’d panicked and left 
him for dead, but they just shook their disbelieving heads. 
‘What would a nice college boy see in a big negro mothafucka 
like you?’ they jeered and T. V. Wright knew there was no 
sensible answer to that question. ‘What do you expect with 
that kind of filth?’ the court-appointed lawyer would have said 
the next day. So T. V. took his advice and confessed to robbery 
and attempted homicide which meant there was no need for a 
trial, no need for the boy to testify in court, just a cursory 
sentencing in front of the judge, and T. V. did nine or ten years 
in Alameda County Jail, he forgot exactly how long, he was so 
busy breaking rocks and getting in fights, years folding into one 
another but when he got out he could still remember the name 
of the boy who put him away. 
‘The police never mentioned anything about this when 
Robert was murdered,’ said Jay, passing the pages back to Dana. 
‘They wouldn’t have known about it unless they had a 
reason to go back and look through manual records. T. V. 
Wright pleaded guilty so Robert didn’t have to go to court. 
Open and shut case.’ 
‘So what happened to him?' 
‘T. V. was released in 1962 but he did time later for a string 
of other convictions, although that was his first and was by far 
175 


PAGE 184:
Aifric Campbell 
the longest stretch. He died in 1983, of natural causes. No 
family.’ 
She tapped the letter and leaned forward to Jay, eyes bright 
with anticipation. ‘In March 1971, T. V. Wright was living in 
downtown LA,’ she delivered her proud punchline. 
‘A coincidence.’ 
‘Possibly. But you've got to admit it’s an interesting one.' 
Jay stood up and retreated to the sink, leaving Dana at the 
table. He busied himself with a coffee refill, glanced at her side 
profile, saw her lips tighten in irritation; she was of course 
somewhat deflated that her little informational scoop didn’t get 
the reaction she expected. This strategy of revealing secrets was 
a regular feature with Jay’s clients. After weeks of withholding, 
they were invariably disappointed at the anti-climatic effect 
when they finally played their trump card. 
‘So let me get this right, Dana,’ he said. ‘You went to the 
LAPD to try and get the case reopened because you think 
Robert was killed as an act of revenge? You think that T. V. 
Wright hunted down and murdered the man who put him away 
in 1953?’ 
‘The police still have the physical evidence collected from 
the scene. At the very least I’d like to get that checked against 
T. V. Wright’s fingerprints. I met with a Detective Rodriguez 
who has been very helpful. It’s a question of prioritising cases—’ 
‘But T. V. Wright is dead, so all that would really be achieved 
is closing a cold case, not putting a killer away.’ 
‘That doesn’t actually have to matter to the CCU. A case 
closed is still a statistical victory from their point of view.’ 
‘You expected the police to listen to a biographer’s hunch?’ 
‘I thought it was worth a shot.’ 
Jay could imagine how Dana would have turned a few 
passing heads at the LAPD as she sat at Rodriguez’s desk, 
trying to convince him of the urgency of her cause, wearing him 
176 


PAGE 185:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
down with her tenacity. The detective would have listened with 
an air of lugubrious patience that he has developed since being 
moved from Live to Cold, would rustle up some paperwork, let 
her see the post mortem. Jay remembered the photocopied 
motto tacked to the wall of Detective Green’s office: To err is 
human. To forgive is against department policy. 
‘I wonder if Turing's shadow falls heavily on Robert?’ said 
Jay, folding his arms as he leaned back. ‘One dead gay scientist 
leads to another? It may even become a specialty of yours, 
Dana. In Turing’s case, you rejected the suicide verdict. 
Although you shied away from saying so explicitly in your 
book, I suspect you believe that he was murdered. That MI6 
injected the apple with cyanide?' 
‘I simply highlighted the absence of conclusive evidence.’ 
‘Perhaps in your enthusiasm for Robert’s case, you are 
ignoring the fact that some people deliberately choose the high- 
risk option. They may not calculate the risks, or risk itself may 
have been the object of the game. Now what could that mean?’ 
She returned his question with a defiant stare. 
‘It might mean,’ said Jay, ‘that they crave the excitement of 
the sexual outlaw, but the physical experience doesn’t match up 
to the intellectual. Their carnal adventures never produce the 
same fireworks, so they up the stakes, searching for a thrill that 
never comes close. But we wouldn’t understand that. People 
like you and I are a different species, lesser mortals dazzled by 
their glare.' He moved closer, resting his palms on the table in 
front of her. ‘Sometimes we look for conspiracy theories when 
we are unwilling or unable to accept the truth. When it is too 
painful. We rail against the truth when we think it’s unfair. A 
little childish don’t you think?’ Her mouth stretched into a 
grim smile. ‘You were angry that Turing died young and 
brilliant. You believed he was betrayed in the end by those who 
courted him. And now you’re angry about Robert, so you want 
177 


PAGE 186:
Aifric Campbell 
to make his murder more than it is. You want a better story.’ 
Dana was shaking her head. Jay straightened up and folded 
his arms. ‘Perhaps it’s really a work of fiction that you want to 
write and not a biography. You think the explanation that 
Robert was killed by a couple of tricks that he picked up 
cruising is sad and sordid. Even worse, you think it’s mundane. 
You would prefer a more glamorous conspiracy theory.’ 
Jay rested his eyes on the blank wall behind her head. ‘Tell 
me, Dana. Have you given any thought to my feelings about a 
reopening of the case after thirty years? Have you any idea how 
distressing that would be?’ 
‘I thought Robert’s brother would want justice to be served. 
I know this is a shock but—’ She stopped mid-sentence, sighed 
and bent her head. And for a moment they both remained still 
and motionless in the kitchen, so still he could hear her 
breathe. 
‘Jay,’ she said, looking up. ‘The LAPD did take my biogra¬ 
pher’s hunch seriously. Last night after I got back to the hotel I 
checked my email. That’s why I stopped by here on my way to 
the airport. Detective Rodriguez wrote to let me know that the 
Cold Case Unit has decided to officially reopen the investiga¬ 
tion into Robert’s murder.’ 
178 


PAGE 187:
• SIXTEEN • 
A sharp buzz cut through the kitchen and they both turned 
their heads towards the wall. Jay walked over and pressed the 
intercom. 
‘Mr Jay Hamilton?’ boomed a male voice. 
‘Yes?’ 
‘Metropolitan Police. Could I have a word?’ 
Jay stood mute listening to the crackle. ‘Of course. I’ll be 
right up.’ 
Dana contemplated her hands, trying not to show any 
curiosity about the unannounced visitor. 
‘Excuse me a moment,’ he managed and in the few seconds 
it took him to cover the short distance between the kitchen and 
the front door, Jay monitored his pulse-quickening response to 
this intrusion. Pausing on the matwell with a wariness that put 
all his instincts on high alert, he took a deep breath and reached 
for the latch, knowing already what to expect. 
‘Good morning,’ he said, in a voice that immediately struck 
✓ 
him as too loud. 
‘Detective Morrison,’ announced a tall heavy-set man in his 
late thirties. He withdrew a large palm from inside a short 
raincoat and flashed an ID which he immediately returned to 
his breast pocket. Jay nodded, unable to find a voice in his 
constricted throat. It was an anxiety response, of course, an 
allergic reaction to the presence of policemen, the legacy of 
having lived through a murder investigation, of watching a life 
1 79 


PAGE 188:
Aifric Campbell 
picked clean. 
Jay let his hand fall and stepped aside as the detective 
brushed his coated bulk past him, reminding himself that these 
house calls are never accompanied by gentle preliminaries lest 
they prejudice the ensuing proceedings, as if the police might 
unwittingly shake hands with a criminal. A dark tie skirted the 
opened top button of the detective’s shirt. He had the air of a 
man who has slipped out of a regular sporting habit. Morrison 
moved down the hallway and stopped at the door to the living 
room. 
‘No, please, go straight ahead,’ said Jay for although this 
path would lead him into an unavoidable encounter with Dana, 
it was preferable to a violation of the safe space. Jay would 
simply have to expedite the issue. 
Morrison stood just inside the threshold to the kitchen, 
blocking Jay's view of Dana, his head skimming the recessed 
spotlights. The room seemed suddenly cramped as if he had 
managed to lower the ceiling by several inches. 
‘Sorry to interrupt,’ he said, without sincerity. 
‘Dr Dana Flynn,’Jay introduced from behind the detective. ‘I 
am assisting her with some research.’ 
‘Maybe I should give you a moment,’ she said, rising from 
the table. ‘I’ll just wait in the living room.’ 
‘No!’Jay exclaimed. Dana stopped. Morrison turned to Jay. 
‘I mean it’s my consulting room—’ 
‘Is there someone in there at the moment?' asked the 
detective, intrigued by this outburst. 
‘No, no. It’s just - it wouldn’t be - appropriate,' said Jay. 
Morrison regarded him with an exaggerated arch of his 
eyebrows. 
‘Maybe I should leave,’ said Dana. 
‘No, not at all, why don’t you wait upstairs in the study? I’m 
sure this won't take long,’ Jay turned a prompting smile to 
180 


PAGE 189:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
Morrison who was apparently unable or unwilling to offer an 
opinion on this subject. 
‘It concerns Cora Miller/ said the Detective, deciding to 
hurry the proceedings along, and Jay had the distinct impres¬ 
sion that he had deliberately volunteered this information 
while Dana was within earshot. 
Morrison rested his large hands on the back of the chair that 
she had just vacated in a gesture that struck Jay as offensively 
territorial. The detective glanced down at the open box file and 
the photo of Robert and looked up at Jay as if checking the 
likeness. 
‘My brother,’ said Jay, approaching the table. ‘He’s dead,’ 
and Morrison nodded, as if to say that is exactly what he had 
expected. 
‘Are you a doctor, Mr Hamilton?’ 
‘No, I’m a psychoanalyst. Cora has been a client of mine for 
almost three months. She missed her 8 am session this 
morning,’ he said, knowing that Morrison will already be in 
possession of this information, that some appointments book 
or diary will have led him here. ‘I’ve been here all morning but 
she hasn’t called.’ 
‘When was the last time you saw her?’ 
‘Yesterday afternoon. For her 4.30 session.’ 
‘Why was she seeing you?’ 
‘Why does anyone see a therapist?’Jay said, but his glibness 
was rewarded with a neutral stare from the detective. ‘There 
were things she needed to work through.’ 
‘Specifically?’ 
‘There are issues of confidentiality here.’ 
Morrison straightened up and fixed him with an intent gaze. 
‘Mr Hamilton. Yesterday, at approximately 6 pm, Cora called 
l 8 l 


PAGE 190:
Aifric Campbell 
round to visit her godson Christopher who is ten months old. 
While Christopher’s mother was upstairs, Cora disappeared 
with the baby. Neither of them have been seen or heard from 
since.’ 
Jay took a blind step forwards and for a. moment the scene, 
the kitchen, Morrison and everything that had happened took 
on the quality of a dream. He lowered himself slowly into a 
chair, placing both hands palm down on the table. Biting down 
hard on the inside of his cheek, he blinked, waved a hand in 
front of his face as if batting away some flying insect. It was an 
illusion, of course, this apparent collision of fiction and reality, 
the impression that his imagination might have shaped the 
actual course of event. 
‘So, Mr Hamilton, I am investigating the abduction of a 
child,' said the detective, sitting down with heavy permanency 
in the chair opposite him. ‘And I think you’ll agree, that under 
these circumstances, you may want to tell me everything you 
know.’ 
‘Of course, of course,’ said Jay, nodding his head. ‘Well, 
there is rarely one simple reason as to why a person comes to 
therapy, but Cora was struggling to come to terms with her 
childlessness. She had become increasingly preoccupied these 
last few sessions. She was anxious. Agitated. Upset.’ 
And yesterday?’ 
‘She was very... distressed.’ 
‘Is Cora on any medication?’ 
‘Not that I know of. She was originally referred to me by Dr 
Ralph Laekin. He practises in Abingdon Villas. You should 
check with him, I’ll give you the number.’ Jay gathered from the 
detective’s disinterest in this information that he had already 
pursued this line of inquiry and he felt a charge of anger at 
Laekin for not calling him in advance. 
‘So what, in your opinion, is happening here?’ 
182 


PAGE 191:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
‘First of all, I have no idea where Cora is. This - abduction - is 
* 
not something she ever discussed as a possibility. Never,’ he 
repeated with emphasis. ‘I would say that she is likely to take 
good care of Christopher. I can only speculate, but her instinct 
will not be to harm him. She will feel guilty, appalled by what 
she has done.' 
‘And?’ 
‘I would expect her to return the child.’ 
‘To give herself up?’ 
‘To return the child.’ 
The detective stood up abruptly, shifting his bulk off the 
chair with a surprising grace. ‘I’d like to see your consulting 
room now,’ he said and Jay swallowed his indignation at this 
peremptory request. Did this oaf imagine that he had Cora 
stashed away in his front room? But Morrison wasn’t waiting 
for his assent, he was already making his way into the hall. As 
Jay reached for the key above the doorframe, he could feel the 
detective's eyes leech into the nape of his neck. He pulled aside 
and Morrison stepped inside ahead of him, head bent out of 
habit rather than necessity. 
Jay stood on the threshold, tracking the detective’s gaze 
around the room, feeling as if he had been absent for a long 
time and had come back to find everything slipped into 
disrepair. There was a palpable sense of vacancy, a dry stale 
smell of enclosed air that he had not noticed before, as if the 
space had languished unused. A film of fine white dust had 
settled on the lower frame of the Picasso. The desiccated corpse 
of an upended fly lay on the narrow windowsill. His clients’ feet 
had worn uneven patches in the carpet by the couch and the 
velvet cushions were shiny and bald. The white walls were 
streaked and yellowing and in the far corner was the unmistak¬ 
able stain of mildew. Jay was reminded of an abandoned 
theatre, some local rep where lame productions of ambitious 
183 


PAGE 192:
Aifric Campbell 
dramas are attempted by enthusiastic amateurs and, for a 
moment, he could see it all through the detective’s reductive 
lens: it was the dressing room of an impostor, with all its sad 
props and the trappings of disguise, and Jay was some 
peepshow pervert whose grubby hand twitched in his crotch 
while feeble-minded clients paid him to watch them undress. 
Morrison made a clicking noise with his lips as if to declare 
his distaste at the chicanery that was practised in this space, as 
if Jay was some muttering crone who foostered about with 
herbal scraps and potions, bamboozling empty-headed idiots 
with his hocus-pocus. Jay bent his head, wiping his palms on 
the side of his trouser leg, the deflated costume of a clown. 
‘As a matter of interest, Mr Hamilton, how do you treat 
people?’ 
‘By providing a safe space where they can come to talk.' But 
he could hear how the empty clang of this explanation must 
reverberate in Morrison’s sceptical ears, a disbelief that anyone 
would dare to provide such an ephemeral service that masquer¬ 
aded as something useful when there is no prescription pad, no 
scientific method, just like those carpetbaggers in the movies, 
who roll into town and peddle their three-cent bottles of vile- 
tasting elixirs from the back of a cart. The truth slid like an 
icicle down Jay’s back. He was nothing more than a charlatan 
who swindled gullible fools out of their stories with a bouquet 
of false promises, promising a poultice for the soul, when all he 
really had to offer was a couch in his living room where clients 
can vent their hysteria or hatch their criminal plans. 
Morrison shook his heavy head. There was an unspoken 
accusation that this was a most unsavoury arrangement and 
there was also a suggestion of guilt and blame, that Jay might 
even have failed in his duty of care, that rather than indulging 
Cora’s rantings, he should have found a better way to manage 
her distress. The stink of negligence hung in the air, for this 
184 


PAGE 193:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
* 
crisis might have been averted if she had been placed in the 
hands of a competent professional, someone with verifiable 
medical skills, someone like a psychiatrist, or maybe even 
Laekin, who could have recognised the gravity of the situation 
and taken affirmative action, put Cora on a drug regime. It was 
the age-old debate about science and quackery and Jay flinched 
at the memory of Robert’s slur flung out across the lecture 
theatre, the cheap joke about Freud, the stinging letter warning 
him off his chosen career path, Robert urging him to do 
something more constructive, more worthy, more scientific; 
something more like Robert. Jay could see it all reflected in 
Morrison’s contemptuous regard: the suspicion that analysts 
are good for absolutely nothing and should be kept well away 
from any serious matters. 
‘Cora believes her infertility is the punishment for an 
abortion she had when she was nineteen,’ said Jay, in an 
attempt to convince the detective that he could see the dangers 
hidden in Cora’s depths. ‘Her desperation for a child has made 
her unhealthily attached to her godson. To Christopher. She 
believes they have a special relationship. So, in her desire to 
have a child—’ 
‘She abducted one,' interrupted Morrison and Jay realised 
that his effort to try and demonstrate his insight had simply 
inflamed the situation and proven his culpability, reducing him 
in the detective’s eyes to a loose cannon: Jay knew everything 
and he did nothing. He didn’t take pre-emptive action, didn’t 
warn, didn’t do anything useful or heroic or manly, he simply 
sat in his armchair and waited for the axe to fall. 
‘There are always a number of possible outcomes in 
therapy,’ he muttered. ‘No one can predict these things.’ 
‘So tell me, Mr Hamilton, when would an analyst intervene?’ 
‘It is very difficult to know what the right moment is,’ Jay 
admitted. Morrison considered him sternly, rolling backwards 
185 


PAGE 194:
Aifric Campbell 
on his heels, preparing to depart now that he had satisfied 
himself that Jay was incapable of providing constructive 
assistance in this urgent matter. He would leave him to reflect 
on his fraudulence, satisfied that he had made his point. Jay 
followed him back out to the hall and took the offered card. 
'Going away?’ the detective asked, eyeing the travel bag on 
the floor. 
‘Actually it’s mine,’ said Dana’s voice above them and at that 
moment Jay remembered how she had been marooned upstairs 
in the study with her biographer’s snooping nose. How her 
prying eyes must have widened when she saw his manuscript 
invitingly positioned on his desk - the lure of the title page 
would have been too much to resist, of course, especially since 
she’d heard Morrison use Cora’s name. She would have reached 
out a cautious hand, lifted the first page, with half an ear to the 
landing trying to hear the conversation in the kitchen. 
‘I’m flying back to LA this evening,’ she said, hurrying down 
the stairs, ‘But I really should get going now,’ she cast a quick 
glance in Jay’s direction. 
‘Oh, surely you can stay a little longer,’ he said, stepping 
forward to the bottom of the stair, for he could not let her leave 
with all the wrong impressions. But Dana slipped neatly past 
him, studiously avoiding eye contact, talking in a rapid bright 
chatter about being wait-listed for an earlier flight and getting 
stuck in motorway traffic, as if this incessant stream could 
disguise the fact that she had most definitely read Cora’s story 
and was now confused but alert enough to pursue an instinct 
that urged her to leave this uncomfortable situation with the 
large detective who was now gallantly helping her with her 
coat. 
‘My satchel,’ she bleated and Morrison looked over at Jay 
who stalled, resistant, but was forced to retreat to the kitchen 
and retrieve her bag. Dana thanked him and.slipped it over her 
186 


PAGE 195:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
shoulder. She had aligned herself firmly on the capable side of 
law and order and was being discreetly removed from his 
custody. 
‘Let me at least call you a cab,’ he said, in a final bid to keep 
her but she insisted that she would pick one up on the street, 
she had plenty of time and anyway she hated sitting around 
waiting. Morrison nodded in approval, endorsing her decision. 
‘Perhaps I could drive you to the airport,’ Jay offered 
recklessly and she stared at the floor as if this was the most 
improper of suggestions. He suspected that the detective was 
enjoying watching him squirm on what he believed was the 
hook of a failed seduction. 
‘If you don’t mind, Mr Hamilton,’ said Morrison, ‘I think it 
would be wise if you could stay here for the next couple of 
hours. On the off-chance that our party contacts you.’ 
‘Yes, of course. I’m sorry,’ said Jay, apologising for being so 
insensitive as to forget that a baby had been abducted, that 
little Christopher’s life hung in the balance. 
‘Well, goodbye, Jay. And thanks again for all your help,’ 
Dana’s hand slid out of his grip. They crossed the road, 
Morrison wheeling her cabin bag behind him while Jay watched 
from his step as they disappeared round the corner of Edwardes 
Square. 
187 


PAGE 196:
• SEVENTEEN • 
‘Baby Christopher latest,’ yelled a newsstand seller outside the 
tube station and Jay swivelled round, for a moment expecting 
the passers-by to turn towards him and demand an explana¬ 
tion, or at the very least an admission of guilt. He hurried 
across Wright’s Lane, heading west along Kensington High 
Street, through the disjointed stream of Christmas shoppers 
until he stopped dead, right in front of Cora’s face. Suspended 
in the late afternoon gloom, in the centre of a window display, 
was a large flat screen, flanked on either side by a column of 
three smaller screens, all of them linked by twisted ropes of 
silver tinsel. He guessed the photo was maybe two or three 
years old, for Cora appeared slightly fuller about the face, 
healthier and more vivid on screen than in the flesh and 
sporting a staged smile that she seemed to have embraced with 
excessive zeal. Her hair was a glossy chestnut, her cheeks rosy, 
her eyes bright with future promise: this was not a picture of a 
woman who would run off with her best friend’s baby. 
As Jay stood transfixed by the display, some invisible remote 
control erased her photo and replaced it with a young man and 
woman wearing red-and-white Santa hats beside an over¬ 
decorated Christmas tree. The girl put her hands to her cheeks 
in a gesture of exaggerated amazement as the camera panned 
back to reveal a bewildered reindeer standing behind her in the 
studio, two gold baubles dangling from its antler. The reindeer 
took a step forwards, lowering its head. The girl jumped and 
188 


PAGE 197:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
threw her arms around the male presenter’s neck who raised 
his clenched fists in mock fighting pose. A large screen behind 
them zoomed into a close-up of a snowy landscape and a shot 
of the huddled and now be-furred presenters taking off on a 
dog sled driven by a red-coated and rather morose Santa. The 
sled bumped and whooshed in huge dollops of snow and 
vanished into a blue horizon. 
The scene shifted to an ashen-faced man in his thirties, red- 
rimmed eyes averted from the intrusive glare of the camera. At 
the bottom of the screen a scrolling banner read 
17:01 BREAKING NEWS: CORA MILLER’S HUSBAND PLEADS 
FOR BABY CHRISTOPHER’S SAFE RETURN 
Larry Miller sat between a uniformed Detective Inspector 
and a middle-aged woman who had the sympathetic gravitas of 
a psychologist. He stared down at his pale hands splayed on the 
baize-covered table, clearly appalled by this public scrutiny. 
Unshaven, wearing a dark suit jacket and an unbuttoned collar 
with no tie, Larry had no doubt been bundled off the plane at 
Heathrow into a makeshift newsroom so that this bulletin 
could be beamed out while there was still a chance that Cora's 
trail was fresh. Jay guessed that the police were aiming for 
saturation publicity, inspired perhaps by the success of the 
Amber Alert in the US, which suggested that a media blitz in 
the first thirty-six hours after a child abduction is critical for a 
successful outcome. After that time, the trail goes cold, 
memory dulls and you’re far more likely to wind up with a 
corpse on your hands. 
The Detective Inspector leaned forward in direct address to 
the camera but Jay kept his eyes focused on Larry’s bowed 
head, imagined him slumped in some interview room before 
the news conference being gently but firmly pressed for 
information about Cora, any little detail that might be helpful 
189 


PAGE 198:
Aifric Campbell 
in this search, any little habit, anything at all. But Larry 
wouldn’t have been able to think of anything unusual, possibly 
because he’s been so much in New York working on some 
incredibly complex transaction that leaves him too exhausted 
to be observant on the weekends when he’s at home, but still 
apparently alert enough to have arranged a regular ‘Wild at 
Heart’ delivery to his wife’s office. Cora had told Jay about the 
weekly bouquet of white roses she received every Thursday and 
the card that said ‘See you tomorrow, all my love’. Once the 
shop had made a mistake or perhaps some assistant had thought 
the ordered message too predictably bland and put in xxx after 
Larry’s name, something he would never think to do, although 
he was thoughtful, if not always spontaneously and he never 
complained about long hours or the tedium of shuttling back 
and forth on the red-eye. Jay suspected that Larry’s transatlantic 
spell was a well-timed opportunity to absent himself from over¬ 
exposure to Cora's interior space, although she did insist that he 
had always been magnanimous about her gynaecological 
shortcomings, repeatedly assuring her that he would happily 
countenance a childless future, especially as it was all happening 
in his career right now, albeit slightly late out of the box. 
Larry was replaced by a shot of a South Kensington villa that 
Jay recognised as Pelham Crescent. A female reporter with 
severely cropped hair gestured at the white house behind her 
and the scene switched to a home video of a smiling toddler 
with large blue eyes and curly blond hair who stood clinging to 
the arm of a couch. He started unsteadily towards the camera 
dressed in a Winnie the Pooh T-shirt, clutching a teddy bear 
with his left hand, looking up with a red-cheeked enquiry. The 
lens panned frantically backwards as Christopher wobbled 
closer and flopped down on his nappied bottom, flapping his 
hands in delight. 
Larry’s face reappeared in close up and Jay lip-read the 
190 


PAGE 199:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
words: Please Cora come home. Larry will have been advised to 
appeal directly to her - to talk to her calmly and reassuringly, to 
focus on repeating her name, to emphasise the personal. I just 
want you to come home. To hook a direct line to her conscience 
which would be shattered and fragmented, her reserves close to 
depletion as she sputtered towards disaster. Christopher needs his 
mummy. But Jay knew Cora wouldn’t be listening, by now she 
would be tuned in exclusively to the internal narrative of 
nonsense that swirled around her head with all the clanking 
dissonance of a Stockhausen piece. 
The woman psychologist patted Larry’s shoulder and his 
face came back into view, the contortions of grief had drained 
all colour from his skin. Please, Cora. Bring Christopher home. I— 
I— I— but his head flopped down, he could not bring himself 
to complete the sentence which might have been the reassuring 
declaration of love he had been instructed to deliver, three little 
words that have tripped so easily from his lips for years now, 
but he couldn’t do it, he couldn’t say it, for Cora had, in one 
movement, become a person he didn’t know, a monster of 
hidden passion and resolve that was apparently his wife. 
He raised his head and looked past the camera with a 
bewildered squint. Jay nodded at the screen, this was a familiar 
moment that he has witnessed so many times, for Larry was 
staring now into a past that he no longer recognised. The fact 
was, he hadn’t been watching Cora at all, but rather the outline 
of what he’d expected she would be when she first appeared in 
front of him one Saturday lunchtime in the crowded Oyster Bar 
at Grand Central, a faint acidity of Chardonnay on her English 
lips. He remembered how she’d been introduced by some 
woman friend of an ex whose name escaped him now and how 
afterwards, he couldn’t stop thinking about her and it wasn't 
long till he had her, after a quick divorce from one of those 
disposable first marriages that don’t really count. Perhaps the 
19 l 


PAGE 200:
Aifric Campbell 
seeds of this tragedy were sown even then, for Larry hadn’t 
really been listening and Cora hadn’t really volunteered much 
about herself, she treated the past as if it was an irrelevance, as 
if there was not necessarily a causal relationship between one 
moment and the next and, in fact, Larry had thought it refreshing 
that she seemed intent on living exclusively in the here-and- 
now, when the previous women in his life were always time¬ 
travelling in reverse. He knew that Cora had been feigning sleep 
on the nights when he was home but he never saw the point in 
dwelling on stuff that his wife chose to remain silent about and 
anyway Larry fell asleep as soon as his head hit the pillow. 
Larry shook his head slowly, his jaw slack, lips parted. He 
was, Jay could see, transfixed by the realisation that he had 
completely failed to detect the subtle emphasis in Cora’s life, it 
always had the feel of something remote that was happening far 
away in another person’s world and now his inattention to her 
silent broodiness was screaming in his ear, making him look 
foolish and insensitive. Didn’t he know well enough that it’s 
always a mistake to rely on what people tell you, to just assume? 
Yes, Larry would admit now that there has always been the 
sense of something lurking beneath the surface, and yes, he had 
certainly failed to accord sufficient urgency to Cora’s need for a 
baby but how could he have foreseen that this thwarted desire 
could transform her into an abductress, like a snake in the fruit 
basket? Nothing prepares you for the discovery of this ice hole, 
the strange and barren landscape that subverts your days. 
Larry's fingers scrabbled at the table. The psychologist patted 
his hand but he didn’t even register her touch, for he was 
clawing at some desperate fantasy where Cora would appear on 
their doorstep, hand over the baby and they would flee to some 
private sanatorium in Switzerland like the characters in a 
Fitzgerald novel. A bleak sob escaped his lips. Surely she 
wouldn’t, surely she couldn’t, harm the baby? 
192 


PAGE 201:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
‘Lepauvre,’ muttered a woman’s voice, tipping Jay out of reverie 
and into a sideways glance away from the screen to a luxurious 
fur collar that completely obscured the lower half of a woman’s 
face. ‘How could she steal that little bebe?’ she demanded, 
turning a pair of green eyes to Jay and immediately refocusing 
on the specifics of their encounter. Straightening her shoulders, 
she smiled and reappraised the situation, patted her dark 
chignon as if checking whether the distressing footage had 
disturbed the arrangement. ‘That woman must never be 
forgiven,’ she pronounced and Jay was struck by the accuracy of 
her verdict - it was true that indefinite psychiatric incarceration 
would be the most merciful punishment Cora could expect. 
The woman considered his ineffectual response and tilted her 
head upwards and to the left, offsetting her profile to its best 
advantage. ‘It is a tragedy,’ she sighed, with a theatrical 
softening of the ‘g’ to advertise her French-ness, in case Jay had 
missed this crucial detail. ‘These things, they bring people 
together,’ she fluttered a glove. 
Once, Jay recalled, he had met a woman just like this in 
Waterstone's and allowed her conversational gambits to chart a 
relatively straightforward route to bed after the brief interval of 
drinks and dinner. She had left her book bag behind in his 
hallway, a copy of How to Transform Your Life in Seven Days, but 
had never returned to claim it, as he had known she wouldn’t 
after his unceremonious dismissal of her at midnight. Lately, he 
has begun to find it tiresome, the investment of time in 
seductions that had invariably yielded so little in return. There 
was, Jay thought, staring at the window, very little left to do. 
‘We must all unite in hope,' the Frenchwoman added, but 
she was flagging now in the absence of a response. She cast a 
quick glance at the street and disappeared into the moving 
crowd. 
Cora’s photo seemed to have faded and aged even in the few 
193 


PAGE 202:
Aifric Campbell 
minutes since last viewing, as if the print was evaporating. 
Seven screens replayed the press conference, although Jay 
imagined that Larry was at home by now on the advice of the 
police, waiting for Cora to return or call, cradling a heavy glass 
of whisky, something perhaps he doesn’t normally drink but 
he’d sip it obediently at the insistence of his friends, because all 
the rules have changed, his life has been laid bare, his marriage, 
his photo collection, and he is numbed to any further exposure, 
clinging to the memory of better times but unable to escape the 
madness that leers back at him from Cora's televised face. How 
does your wife go crazy right under your nose? And what does 
that make you? Where were the boundaries of blame and guilt 
in the small circle of their intimate life? It seemed for a moment 
as if Larry knew nothing at all about Cora except her dress size. 
Jay could see him beached in the couch, fending off the 
stalking guilt. What could I have done differently, Larry will ask 
his bleak hands and his best friend, for he will need to have 
some fellow American on the premises at a time like this, 
someone called Andy or Chuck or Bob who will say things like, 
‘Hey, don’t go there. There was nothing you could have done. 
Come on, Larry, you’ve got to keep it together now, man.’ 
Someone to comfort him in this new alien life that has claimed 
him, someone who will quash his floundering self-recrimina¬ 
tions with a sturdy rebuttal, someone whose wife will make 
coffee and sandwiches in the kitchen, in a background attempt 
to introduce some reassuring domesticity to the proceedings 
and frown warningly at the whisky bottle, summoning her 
husband into the hall to whisper, ‘He needs to stay sober. You 
know, in case the police—’ she gestures for the right word to 
cover a host of possibilities that Andy/Chuck/Bob will dismiss 
with, ‘Jesus, what the hell difference is that gonna make now?’ 
But they both jump at the sound of the doorbell and watch the 
detective stride past them into the hall. Back in the couch, 
194 


PAGE 203:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
Larry’s head lolls, Cora has catapulted him into chaos, with one 
fell stroke he has lost everything and he wonders if there is a 
worst, or if that already happened when his wife exploded into 
a media sensation on the screens above the trading floor at the 
bank where he works and all over the world, gaining him 
international notoriety. 
He will never again think of her with ease. He will never lose 
the suspicion that she faked everything and that he somehow 
failed to spot the fatal flaw that allowed her to do something so 
terrible. Larry is already in flight and wants to erase the 
memory, to be shipped home by his accommodating employer, 
to downshift into something more anonymous, lower key - the 
Midwest or maybe Denver, somewhere forgettable where he 
can start over. 
Jay pulled back from the shop window and continued along 
Kensington High Street, turning a sharp left into the sanctuary 
of Abingdon Road. He stopped outside the police station on 
Earls Court Road where a hastily assembled poster of Cora and 
Christopher was housed in a wall-mounted glass box by the 
entrance. The print had the washed-out impermanence of a 
colour photocopy and already looked as if it had been there for 
some time. Hurrying along the bricked boundary of the station, 
his footsteps echoed on the tarmac as if they were announcing 
his presence to the empty lane, they were keeping step with his 
contracting heart. But Jay could not slow his pace, his legs 
accelerated as he rounded the corner to Edwardes Square with 
the jerky motion of a speed walker on the home run and he fell 
upon his front door like a finish line. 
He heard the ringing phone and stood panting in the 
hallway, listening to Laekin’s message. 
‘Dreadful business with Cora Miller. I - eh - imagine the 
195 


PAGE 204:
Aifric Campbell 
police have been round by now. Jay.’ He sighed. ‘I didn’t know 
she had taken my advice and was seeing you. Must be very 
distressing. Anything I can do, well you know. So, we’ll - um - 
be in touch. And of course - eh - naturally hope for the best.’ 
Consequences. Jay could feel the air thicken, like the hour 
before a storm and he climbed the stair, loosening his collar, 
stopping at the top, short of breath and leaden as if at high 
altitude. A slant of streetlight shone through the French 
windows, illuminating his manuscript in a yellow glow. There 
on his desk lay Cora’s story, a full and accurate account of 
today’s headline news. 
This morning, after he closed the door on Dana and Detective 
Morrison, Jay had sprinted up to the study, taking the steps 
three at a time, to watch the departing couple heading north 
towards Kensington High Street under a light drizzle. He stared 
at their receding Figures, as if by concentrating he could 
eavesdrop on their conversation. Dana would have mentioned 
Cora’s name at the first opportunity, reminding Morrison that 
she had heard it from his lips as she left the kitchen. The 
detective would have volunteered the public information that 
he was investigating Cora Miller in connection with the 
abduction of a baby. When Dana stopped dead on the 
pavement, her mouth popping open as if she’d hit an air pocket, 
Morrison would bend a solicitous head and ask if she was all 
right and she would compose herself and mutter ‘Oh yes, yes, 
thank you, how awful,’ not knowing what else to say, for 
anything she did say might sound ridiculous. 
The detective had the kind of reassuring presence that 
invited the disclosure of silly fears, but Dana knew better than 
to say the first thing that came into her head. And what could 
she actually tell him, except that she had seen what she 
196 


PAGE 205:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
believed was a case history on Jay’s desk about a woman called 
Cora and, driven by the base curiosity of a biographer who 
spends her life riffling through other peoples’ possessions, she 
had to confess that she had sneaked a read, she couldn’t resist 
the title. In the case history, the woman called Cora had 
abducted a baby and the weird thing was that stylistically it 
read more like a work of fiction than a case history, but then so 
did Freud in her opinion, she had to admit she wasn’t really 
qualified to judge... 
But Dana had not spoken, had obviously decided to hold her 
peace and let Morrison hail her a taxi on the High Street, 
deposit her bag in the back and shake her hand, ignoring an 
angry car horn behind the stalled cab. Jay suspected she had 
lost her nerve in the rush and the confusion and the stink of 
exhaust, but all the way to the airport it would gnaw at her as 
she pondered the convergence of reality and fiction, thinking 
there must be something she had missed, for how could Jay 
have known? How could he have predicted? She must have got 
it wrong. 
Jay stepped up to the glass, his reflection swallowed by the 
dark well of the garden square below him. The house was alive 
with the whispered fragments that haunted his safe space, 
rolling out from under the door up the stairs, filling the night 
with their fictions. He stood in the extinguished light, watching 
a lone vixen slide out through the railings and cut a sly 
northwards dash to a night banquet in Holland Park. A large 
Mercedes nosed around the corner and began an ambitious 
attempt to manoeuvre itself into an undersized parking space. 
A man stepped out of the passenger side and hurried to the 
front gesturing impatiently at the driver. The car inched 
forwards and the man shouted, smacking the bonnet and 
flinging his hands into the air. The driver’s door opened and a 
tall woman in a fur-trimmed hat emerged. She glared at the 
197 


PAGE 206:
Aifric Campbell 
man over the roof of the idling car and then turned on her high 
heel and walked away. The man shook his head and walked 
round to the driver’s door. The car lurched forwards and 
followed the woman down the street. 
Jay moved back to the desk and patted his manuscript. 
Gently as if it was incendiary. There was nothing left to do now 
but wait. He was powerless to impact Dana, a call on her 
mobile would only compound the issue and might even tip her 
over the edge, she was out of range and he needed to operate 
within controllable constraints. In twelve hours’ time she will 
be standing by a baggage carousel at LAX with a planeload of 
sullen passengers and she would still be thinking about Cora. 
She'll take a cab straight to her rental on Tiverton and Le 
Conte, log on to her PC and check the international news, 
study the footage of Larry’s appeal. She will decide to go for a 
run, telling herself it’s all explainable but Cora’s story will 
snake through her day. Buried in the basement archives at 
Special Collections, Dana will press her fingertips into the 
polished wood desk but her misgivings will simply fuel her 
interest in Robert and she will continue to mine his papers for 
every last clue. 
He looked at his watch. Just about now Dana would be 
queueing at the departure gates in Terminal 4 with the bowed 
head of a long-distance traveller. He imagined her looking over 
the shoulder of the woman in front at the cover of the Evening 
Standard where Christopher’s and Cora’s photos take up half 
the page. The queue shuffles forwards. Dana takes out her 
mobile. She hesitates, tapping her fingers on the warm curve of 
the phone, thinking you don’t call detectives on an abduction 
case on a whim. She looks back at the photo, Christopher 
smiles up at her and the phone grows hot and slippery in her 
hand. ‘No,’ she says aloud, and steps out of the line. She calls 
Directory Enquiries and asks for Morrison’s number. 
198 


PAGE 207:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
Just in case. 
You never know. 
Jay rolled a slim pen across his desk, over and back. Cora could 
not go on much longer. It has been twenty-six hours, the nets 
were closing in. He reached for his keyboard and logged on to 
AOL news. 
HUNT FOR BABY CHRISTOPHER CONTINUES. 11-MONTH- 
OLD BABY CHRISTOPHER WAS ABDUCTED FROM HIS 
CHELSEA HOME YESTERDAY EVENING BY A FAMILY FRIEND 
WHO HAS BEEN NAMED AS CORA MILLER, AGED 37. SHE IS 
DESCRIBED AS 5 FOOT 4 SLIM BUILD BROWN HAIR AND 
GREY EYES. POLICE ARE CONCERNED FOR BOTH OF THEIR 
SAFETY AND ARE ASKING THE PUBLIC TO BE VIGILANT 
AND REPORT ANY SIGHTING 
Jay was convinced she was outdoors, along by the river perhaps, 
or in the dark open spaces of a park, clutching Christopher to 
her breast. He might be asleep, not yet missing his mummy too 
much or the world that is trying to find him. Cora would be 
having moments of exhilarated light-headedness. Christopher 
may start to cry, a long forlorn wail that will not stop. Cora will 
need to find a way to make it stop. 
Jay turned the pages of his manuscript, thinking about the 
Cora in his story who acted on impulse, who drove through the 
night in an unforgiving straight line right out of her own past 
only for it to meet her full circle. It will come full circle in real 
time as well; Jay sees no reason to expect a different ending. 
Cora will understand that her best friend, Christopher’s 
sobbing mother, is itching to wrap her hands around Cora’s 
throat. This was not something you can forgive. There was 
199 


PAGE 208:
Aifric Campbell 
nothing Jay could do other than wait. And hope that reality and 
fiction have not met. Hope for a different ending. 
When Dana tells Morrison, which could be very soon now, 
the detective will lift his large head and immediately follow his 
line of enquiry back to Edwardes Square. Naturally, he will 
want to read the story, so Jay will have to endure the humilia¬ 
tion of watching while he reads. If Jay lied and said there was 
no file to show him, it could be traced by a simple search of his 
cyber trash, for a story is like a person, even after they’ve been 
eliminated you can never be sure you have erased all traces of 
the experience. He reached for the mouse and scrolled down 
the File option, remembering a client, an IT specialist called 
Kevin who used to spend entire sessions talking in coded 
language about the intricacies of his job, his real issues 
screened by the firewall of his expertise. Kevin got his kicks 
from tapping into his colleagues’ emails, stalking their cyber 
lives to give his own a little colour. ‘People think they can get 
rid of files. They think they can create and destroy at will, hah. 
No way. It’s like a black box,’ he sneered, describing in 
laborious detail how the purged file leaves a sprinkling of 
incriminating data on the hard disk that gradually decays over 
time through overwriting, but never completely disappears. 
The only way you can be sure is to take a hammer and smash 
the disk to bits. And even then a forensic expert could piece the 
fragments of those together.' 
No, thought Jay, it would be madness to delete the file. 
Morrison will not enjoy Jay's story at all. He will ask more 
impertinent questions about his practice. He will want to know 
exactly how Jay could possibly have predicted the outcome in 
Cora’s case. From her story, it will be but a short step to the 
revelation that Jay s clients serve a dual purpose as unwitting 
muses for his literary career. Morrison will consider this type of 
activity distinctly objectionable. He will make incredulous 
200 


PAGE 209:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
remarks about educated guesses. The word ‘unethical’ will roll 
heavily across the carpet. Morrison will want to take it 
somewhere. He will explore Jay’s failure to take pre-emptive 
action. He will consider it a failure to save. He will invite Jay 
down to the station. Although Jay is convinced that there is no 
legal culpability in what he has done, he knows that all of this 
will somehow make its way into the public domain. The BPS 
will naturally be appalled at this prurient use of client material, 
the abuse of the therapeutic space, the papers will buzz about 
the ethics of psychoanalysis and the whole issue of regulation 
will become vibrant again with consumer warnings. His name 
will disappear, his book quietly removed from the teaching 
syllabus. His analytic reputation, so hard won, will collapse. 
Cora’s story can never now be published. J. Merritt will be 
outed and publicly disgraced, vilified as a writer who doesn’t 
have the imagination to think up his own stories but must prey 
on others’ misery. His agent and publisher will terminate their 
business arrangement in their embarrassed rush to disassociate 
themselves from such a tawdry alliance. His novels will be 
considered pathetic. Former clients who recognise their 
fragmented appearance in his novels may even try to take legal 
action. His magnificent construction, his beautiful artwork was 
crumbling before his eyes. A life’s work interrupted. 
The phone rang. Jay's hand moved across the desk and lifted 
the receiver, heard the background sound of movement and 
bustle. 
‘How did you know?’ Dana’s voice was tense and small. 
‘I wish you hadn’t left so abruptly, I wanted to explain.’ 
‘Cora Miller is a patient of yours, isn’t she?’ 
‘Yes,’ he admitted, closing his eyes, reminding himself it 
was important to keep a placatory tone. 
201 


PAGE 210:
Aifric Campbell 
‘Your story - how did you know this was going to happen? 
Did Cora tell you what she was going to do?' 
‘Of course not.’ 
‘Then how did you know?’ 
‘I didn’t. It is simply a coincidence.’ 
‘I don’t believe you. It’s too - unlikely.’ 
A blur of airport noise flooded the earpiece. 
‘Sometimes, Dana, reality meets fiction in the most 
surprising ways.’ 
‘But you must have known the risks. You must have known 
this woman was unstable.’ 
‘The story you read is simply one version of a life, one 
moment chosen out of a range of possible moments, one truth 
in a possible world. There is no such thing as a guaranteed 
result.’ A stream of public announcements invaded the connec¬ 
tion, there was a clicking sound and Jay could not be sure if he 
had lost her. ‘Dana?’ 
‘I’ve seen your books here at the airport,’ she said in a flat 
determined voice. ‘I know who J. Merritt is.’ 
‘Clever girl.’ 
‘What are you going to do? You don’t even sound like you 
care.’ 
‘There is nothing I can do. Cora’s story is still playing itself 
out as we speak.’ He looked at the mute TV screen in the corner 
of his study. ‘We have not reached an ending yet.’ 
‘In the story, Cora—' 
‘The story is a work of fiction.’ 
‘Did you tell Morrison?’ 
‘Do you really think the detective is interested in the 
speculations of a novelist?’ 
‘I want him to know,’ she snapped. 
‘Then why haven’t you called him and not me? Might I 
suggest it's because you know that the story is irrelevant? The 
202 


PAGE 211:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
fictional ending cannot affect the real outcome. You are 
grappling with the illusion that I can impact upon the course of 
future events. This is not the case, Dana. You have simply read 
a story.’ 
‘I don’t like what you do,’ she said, her voice very close to 
the receiver. ‘You are using your clients as cannon fodder.’ 
‘I am simply following in a grand literary tradition of writers 
who have always raided their personal experiences. Freud used 
his patients for his own ends. We are all each other’s experi¬ 
ments in an encounter. As a biographer, Dana, you should 
understand that better than most. You exhumed my brother 
without compunction. You engineered the reopening of 
Robert’s murder, resurrected a family tragedy. And for what? 
Because it makes a good story.’ 
‘That’s different.’ 
‘Ah, but you are ringing me up instead of the detective 
because you know this is true.’ 
‘It’s not the same,’ her voice fading, losing conviction. 
‘You must make your own decision about what to do, Dana. 
I have registered your disapproval and I understand your 
concern. But if you think rationally, you will see that there is no 
real difference between you and me. As writers we feed on 
other people’s lives to further our careers. Everything is fair 
game. That is the human condition. So, this is your ethical 
dilemma, not mine.’ 
‘I’m going now.’ 
‘Have a pleasant flight, my dear. Let us hope that reality will 
be kinder than fiction. Goodbye, Dana,’ and the line went dead. 
203 


PAGE 212:
• EIGHTEEN • 
The rain beat out a steady rhythm against the glass. Down 
below him on the street, the vixen had returned and was 
skirting along the garden railings, stopping by the wheel of a 
parked car to begin a delicate inspection of a scrap of paper. 
Jay wondered how long it would take for the LA PD to call. 
He assumed there must be some protocol that required the 
next of kin to be informed when a cold case was reopened, but 
even if there wasn’t, Detective Rodriguez would want to speak 
to Jay in his capacity as the only witness to the events that 
occurred at 3840 North Beverly Drive on 7 March, 1971. Dana 
would in any case have given him Jay’s London phone number 
and will probably soon find a way to voice her reservations 
about his literary analytic career. 
He imagined that the Cold Case Unit would require a 
different kind of detective work entirely and Jay wondered if 
Rodriguez was the analytical type, the kind who is undeterred 
by the passage of time between the crime and the investigation, 
but rather motivated by the chance to clean up history. Perhaps 
he relished the challenge of bodies long since decomposed, 
relatives who have become inured to grief. Maybe he liked long 
odds. Maybe he was done with handling fresh corpses and was 
intrigued by the letter that Dana had found in the archives - 
T. V. Wright lying in his bunk in Alameda County Jail dreaming 
of the day when he would get out and track down the boy who 
put him there, how he would lure him to his death by posing as 
204 


PAGE 213:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
a downtown trick. Maybe Rodriguez had been on the force long 
enough to know that stranger things have happened than a 
slow-burn revenge. 
Dana would have a wonderful story, the professor and the 
thief. Perhaps herself and Rodriguez would appear on Larry 
King Live, an unlikely double act, the biographer-and-cop team 
who solved a thirty-year-old murder mystery with a killer 
combination of painstaking research and supreme detective 
work. 
Robert’s records would be yellowing now, the long dry foolscap 
frayed at the edges. Rodriguez would study the autopsy 
carefully, the language of death would be second nature to him. 
In certain cases, as the Medical Examiner had explained to Jay 
and Detective Green at the scene, strangulation causes sudden 
death: when the sheer pressure of the ligature or the killer’s 
hands crush the vertebrae that protect the spinal arteries and 
cut off the blood supply to the brain. This triggers the lethal 
Vagal reflex and the heart immediately stops beating. The 
victim will exhibit minimal physical signs of injury - perhaps 
some bruising around the neck - and the face will be pale, with 
no engorgement. 
But that’s not how it was for Robert. 
The Medical Examiner had told Detective Green what Jay 
already knew - that Robert had taken much longer to die. He 
pointed to the face speckled with petechiae, blood vessels burst 
in the skin and eyes. This meant that Robert had struggled for 
two or three minutes before lapsing into unconsciousness, 
which is what he was when Jay had found him. It would, the 
examiner confirmed, have taken up to ten minutes for Robert 
to actually die. He might even have lasted longer. 
205 


PAGE 214:
Aifric Campbell 
To this day. Jay could not work out why he had woken at 06:02 
on Sunday, 7 March 1971, only that he had found himself 
staring out the window just in time to see some movement 
around Robert’s Mustang. He ran downstairs, through the open 
door, down the drive of 3840 North Beverly, where he saw two 
or three black men speed off in the car. Jay stood watching as 
they disappeared. 
He ran back into the house, up the stairs, but when his foot 
touched the landing, Jay froze. He had the distinct sensation 
that he was on the brink of a transforming event, although how 
he knew this was indescribable; it was something in the quality 
of stillness, something he didn’t recall articulating, but he 
remembered the conviction that his life was about to be irrevo¬ 
cably changed. 
The bathroom door creaked open onto its ugly display. He 
looked down at Robert’s supine body, his contorted face, the 
lurid purple, the red raw neck, the naked spill of flesh, the jar of 
Vaseline on the washstand, flecks of dark brown on its slimy 
contents, the unmistakable stink of shit and he gagged on a 
virtual retch, slamming a fist into the doorjamb. ‘How could 
you?’ he screamed, crouching over Robert's bruised face. ‘You 
stupid—’ he yelled through a rage of tears, pummelling the 
naked expanse of chest, the waste, the futility, the careless 
inevitable outcome of promiscuity, the ease with which it can 
all end, for end it looked to be. ‘How could you let this 
happen?’ And just then, a hideous twitching began, Robert was 
making small sudden jerks, like a sleeper racked by nightmares, 
it was as if the perpetrators could still reach their victim, as if 
invisible fingers were twisting the tie around his neck. Jay 
understood this was some sort of muscular reflex, that the 
dampening in the hue of Robert’s skin meant he had found a 
clever escape route on the threshold of extinction and was 
clawing his way towards some remarkable recovery, he was 
206 


PAGE 215:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
trying to outwit death with the same grim determination that 
he had pursued the illicit thrills which left him half-strangled 
on the floor. Jay groped for his brother’s limp wrist and felt a 
slow but steady pulse that took him back to Christmas 1954 
and the faint thud of the mongrel’s heart through her juddering 
ribs as she sleep-whimpered in the darkness. He could hear 
Robert’s voice saying, ‘Promise me you’ll take good care of her,’ 
he could feel the delicious touch of his brother’s hand on his 
six-year-old head as he snuggled down on the living-room floor 
and dreamt of all the brotherly moments they would share, 
with the dog leaping through the long grass. But dawn had 
come and Jay’s vision of a fraternal future was quickly 
unravelled by the loosening thread of Robert’s affection as he 
slipped further and further out of reach, lured away by numbers 
and strangers, both equally incomprehensible, until there was 
no space left to accommodate the nudge of a kid brother. And it 
came to Jay as he held his brother’s wrist, that Robert had 
wrecked everything: he had driven away the father, he had 
stolen the store of available motherlove, leaving an impossible 
abyss for Jay to fill, and now, sprawled naked on the bathroom 
floor, he teetered between life and a death brought on by the 
squalid expenditure of desire. 
‘Your own fucking fault,’ Jay shouted and he pulled at the tie 
that was wrapped around his brother’s neck with a gasp of 
recognition, for it was a Christmas present from their mother. 
Robert’s arms twitched, his throat gurgled and Jay sensed a 
flutter of the eyelashes, he felt a straining in his fingers and 
looked down to see his own hands pulling on the murderous 
tie. ‘Let go, let go,’ he pleaded, blinded now by his own tears, or 
perhaps the memory flash of the dead dog, but the striped tie 
bit into the flesh of his palms, he stared down at his clenched 
fists as they tightened the twisted noose around Robert’s neck 
and it was all unstoppable, inevitable, the logical next step for 
207 


PAGE 216:
Aifric Campbell 
both of them. Jay’s was an unreleasable grip and Robert’s face 
was turning a ludicrous violet hue, the moment passing where 
an actioned response might save him. For Jay was choking his 
brother to death, he could feel it in his burning hands and he 
thought of the earlier moment, the little dog and the weight of 
consequence and loss, but he could not let go and in a sunburst 
revelation he understood that he had never reconciled himself 
to anything, that everything that ever had happened had been 
nothing more than the most bitter consolation, it had never ever 
ever for a second been all right. Jay had been screaming for this 
moment all his life. 
And then it was done. Jay was spent, chin slumped against his 
chest. His stiff knees ached, pressed into the cold bathroom 
floor. He was drained and exhausted, but his hands throbbed 
with a new-found peace, for he was released and so too, was 
Robert. Jay fumbled for a pulse, but it was gone. He looked into 
his brother’s bulging eyes. 
This is where love will get you. 
In the deep and curious calm that followed, there was time 
for Jay to think, kneeling on the floor, time to reflect on the 
semantics of death, as life fled and the cadaver arrived. Survival, 
not death, was really the mystery, underrated and under¬ 
explored - the instinct to cling on gasping, to do your time. He 
was stunned by the intimacy of strangulation, it had none of 
the distance of a gunshot or a stab wound, none of the 
impersonality of a weapon, it was such a passionate way to kill, 
and such a feminine way to die; it was the way men murder 
women, the perfect way to slay a lover, when a slow agonising 
death seems appropriate; it was an act of real engagement, 
intensely personal, how you kill when love meets hate, when 
you are so consumed by your victim that your body must 
208 


PAGE 217:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
become the weapon, you must crush the slender windpipe, feel 
the hot thrash of flesh before the body goes slack in your arms. 
And then, in the quiet aftermath, a few moments peace for 
killer and victim to reflect on how they could both have avoided 
this outcome, time to consider their shortcomings and flaws, 
an opportunity for pure remorse while the victim drifts into 
unconsciousness and a final expiring embrace. 
Jay could see clearly now how little there was that separated 
hate from love. 
Very quickly, he believed it was likely that he could evade all 
responsibility. To begin with, the whole business had been kick- 
started by unknown assailants, so Jay had simply completed a 
job left undone. If he had called 911 as soon as he had found his 
brother on the floor and assisted as he was coming round, it 
was possible that Robert might have lived. But he could just as 
easily have died in the initial attack. The outcome was 
unpredictable. One could only speculate on who was the real 
murderer. Jay knew, however, that any further delay in 
reporting this crime would not help his case so he stood up and 
turned his back on this tableau of death, hurried downstairs 
and picked up the phone. There was no question in his mind 
that what he faced here was an obstacle in the administration of 
justice that needed to be circumvented. And that was exactly 
what he did. 
He could smell his own sleep-stained skin as he stood 
waiting on the drive. Pebbles and sharp, crushed twigs pricked 
his bare feet. A scatter of pine cones hit the ground in front of 
him, as if flung by hiding children. He jerked his head at a 
furtive rustling in the needlegrass, but the road was still and 
empty in the creeping dawn. Up there in the dense foothills, a 
host of nameless creatures trembled in the undergrowth terror. 
2 09 


PAGE 218:
Aifric Campbell 
Behind him, at the top of the drive, the front door gaped open 
on all that he had fled and he bent double to ease his scorched 
lungs. A coyote screech split the air and his eyelids burst open 
onto a moment drenched in monochrome, a dry suspension of 
breathing, the surge of adrenaline that had forced him down 
the stairs and it seemed, in memory, as if he had taken flight all 
the way along Mulholland up into the cool starless sky. 
Everything Jay told Detective Green was true. He simply 
omitted to say that he had found Robert close to death and had 
finished him off. His estimates of what the police investigation 
would yield turned out to be accurate: Jay's fingerprints were 
entirely explainable by the act of untying the tie in an attempt 
to resuscitate his brother, his lack of alibi paled against the 
evidence of other (unidentified) prints on the body and the 
ligature, the stolen car (found the next day on Spring Street). 
The sexual implications of the scene dovetailed perfectly with 
Robert’s sleazy habits. And so it was. There was never any 
suggestion other than that Robert had brought this tragedy 
upon himself, which of course he had. If he hadn’t gone 
cruising and brought home a couple of tricks, he would never 
have been attacked in his own home and Jay would never have 
found him lying unconscious on the bathroom floor and 
himself in a situation where his lifetime had converged on a 
single instant with such extraordinary consequence. Jay could 
tell himself that his involvement was small, a last-minute 
contribution. 
‘I have to go see my mother. To tell her,’ Jay said to Green as 
they watched the gurney slide through the waiting doors of the 
coroner's van. 
‘That’s a tough one,’ Green conceded, inspecting the sky 
with a thoughtful frown. ‘You might wanna clean up the 
details. Y’know what I’m saying,’ he added, grinding his 
cigarette into the ground. He patted Jay on the shoulder, more 
2 1 0 


PAGE 219:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
of a backslap really, but in this parting gesture, the Detective 
confided his personal verdict, a little reassurance that the LAPD 
was satisfied that there was an explanation for everything that 
had transpired here. It was a release for Jay, it was the best 
outcome and he was intrigued that murder had never presented 
itself as a conscious wish before. The real mystery was that 
more people were not killed by those who loved them. 
So now, after so many years, what did Jay really have to fear 
from a reopening of Robert’s case? What was there that could 
alert Detective Rodriguez’s suspicions? Was all the evidence 
preserved, did fingerprints decay? Could forensic testing 
somehow reveal that Jay had gripped the tie with a murderous 
force that was consistent with the tightening, not the loosening? 
He did not seriously believe there was a way that he could be 
incriminated. Any case against him would be circumstantial 
and Jay did not see how Rodriguez could find a thing. And what 
purpose would be served by truth, he would like to ask, other 
than the law, justice, balancing of scales, the administration of a 
legal morality? To prove murder they would have to establish 
motive and there was no evidence for a rage that only found its 
articulation in death. 
Or was there? 
Something he had forgotten? Something overlooked but 
survivable, some crucial evidence buried and bagged and 
removed from the scene. Something he did not recall? 
Something that would not escape the tentacles of rigorous 
scientific method? 
Sometimes Jay was no longer sure what the truth was, after 
all this time. Perhaps he had imagined it all. 
But having survived one investigation, he would not care to 
be re-examined, especially in the light of his joint career and 
the coincidence of Cora’s story already written that appears to 
predict events. He would not welcome the scrutiny, for in 
211 


PAGE 220:
Aifric Campbell 
communication there is always risk. There are so many theories 
that collapse under the weight of closer inspection. All these 
years he had been happily reconciled with his own past but 
there was no release now from the uncertainty that will dog 
each second, from the possibility that one day he will answer 
the door and a clean-cut invasion will yield its damning results. 
Taking evasive action would simply create suspicion and Jay 
was not about to make a fool of himself by trying to escape. 
Now, he must endure a purgatory of waiting and then take the 
consequences that are offered him without objection. He has 
spent a lifetime listening to the turgid chronicle of stories with 
the same twist. How astonishing, he thought, watching the 
vixen disappear through the railings, that it never before 
occurred to him to end it all, that his life has been a vigorous 
and persistent search that has simply confirmed the absence of 
something essential. 
At 4 pm on 7 March 1971, Jay got in the car and headed for Van 
Nuys, sped along the 1-170 with the burden of his news, which 
Green had said would probably be reported in the following 
morning's LA Times. In a triumph of timing, he caught his 
mother alone and her voice through the intercom was loud and 
irritable at the unexpected call. He ignored the elevator and 
sprinted up the three flights. The door to her apartment stood 
ajar but she was already shuffling away, hadn’t even bothered to 
stay on the threshold to greet him. 
‘You never said you were coming,’ she grumbled, settling 
with some difficulty into the armchair and he watched, a little 
chagrined at how much the arthritis had slowed her down in 
recent months. He felt cheated not to have found her at the top 
of her game. ‘Why didn’t Robert come with you?’ she asked 
looking irritably towards the door. Peter squawked and flung 
212 


PAGE 221:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
himself against the wall of his cage. Jay sat down beside the 
bookcase. In the shrine on her coffee table, his brother was 
already looking posthumous. 
‘I have bad news,’ said Jay, looking behind her at the parrot’s 
unblinking gape. Her mouth wavered on the cusp of a 
querulous complaint. ‘Some very bad news,’ he said, moving 
over to hunker down in front of her chair. Peter head-butted a 
silver mirror, shuffled along his perch, pecking at the empty air. 
Jay reached up a hand to where his mother’s arm rested on the 
wing, but decided against actually touching. She considered 
him from behind her glasses, reluctant and impatient. 
‘You sick?’ she said, with obvious distaste, fingering a 
button on her cardigan and he realised that her conception of 
bad news did not extend to the unthinkable. 
‘It's Robert,’ he said. 
When he told her, slowly and with emphasis, the veined 
whites of her eyes executed a bovine roll, she slumped 
backwards and for a moment he thought her heart had failed 
but she shrieked and lashed out, catching him with a blow on 
the side of the cheek, delivered with a force enough to bruise. 
The parrot shrieked and crashed about, battering his wings at 
the walls of the cage. His mother grabbed Jay’s lapel and he 
wondered if he dared pin her flapping arms to her sides. ‘It’s 
the truth. Mom. The police have been there all morning. 
Robert's been strangled.’ 
The moment he told her had been so rich in its anticipation 
and so utterly barren in its delivery. His mother’s grief was 
anti-climatic. It was private and utterly inaccessible in its 
visibility. For if Jay could not fathom love, he could not experi¬ 
ence the agony of loss. He could not feel her pain, only bear 
witness to a torment that served to reveal the void within him, 
the barren hole where his own humanity must have withered 
before it had a chance to blossom, assassinated at birth. He 
213 


PAGE 222:
Aifric Campbell 
turned away from her wretched sobbing and moved to the safer 
confines of the kitchen where he called her doctor, finding the 
number pencilled in an address book in the lobby. An hour later 
she was dry, drugged and husk-like, a metamorphosis that 
would never leave her in the few months she had left. It was as 
if the juice had been squeezed out of an orange and the flesh 
left there to shrivel. She sat in the armchair and stared at the 
rim of her teacup. She had no intention of surviving this. 
‘Robert was homosexual. Mom,’ said Jay when the doctor 
had gone. ‘He liked going with Negroes.’ 
Her face wobbled under the assault of so much detail but 
she would not dignify him with a response. 
‘Robert went out last night about ten. First thing this 
morning I saw a couple of them jump into his car. I found him 
on the bathroom floor. He was strangled with his tie. The one 
you gave him for Christmas. The police think it was the guys he 
picked up.’ 
Her eyes regarded him with such consummate disgust that 
Jay could not return her gaze. ‘It was horrible,’ he surprised 
himself by saying in a small whining voice. 
‘You didn’t hear anything in the night.’ 
‘No.’ 
Nothing you could have done?’ In the unspoken exchange 
she managed to communicate her personal suspicion that Jay 
had somehow failed to save his brother and at that moment he 
longed to confess the whole truth, so that his mother would 
understand that responsibility was really hers, it was all her 
fault for never loving him, that she had driven him to seize such 
an opportunity. 
‘You can call Betty, she’ll sit with me. Then you go,’ she said, 
closing her eyes as if the very sight of him revolted her. 
214 


PAGE 223:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
His mother had decided on death. It would be somehow 
arranged. She willed it to happen and so it did, just a few 
months later in an overheated hospital room in Van Nuys. She 
managed to engineer a substantial malignancy on her breast 
that had already taken up secondary positions in her liver and 
intestine, it was the third act in the family drama and she would 
be the next character to clear the stage. Jay came down every 
weekend from San Francisco, undeterred by her indifference, 
his turn now to do the torturous journey, to accolades from her 
nurses and friends. It was a privilege to watch her die. The pain 
in the end was substantial and they were feeding her morphine 
as she drifted in and out of consciousness. ‘She'll be in consid¬ 
erable discomfort,’ the physician said, explaining the drug, but 
Jay would have preferred her death throes not to be alleviated 
and it took all his self-control not to hold a pillow over her 
mouth. It had been a delicious experience, hearing the confir¬ 
mation that the cancer was terminal, with a short-term end in 
sight, but a triumph that clattered emptily when he contem¬ 
plated the impossibility of making her suffer more. It was 
astonishing how she’d managed to wriggle out of her own 
circumstance. She lay in a stupor of anticipation that 
transcended any physical distress, lost not in the pain of her 
decaying body but in the agony of bereavement and therefore 
propelled by an urgency to get this dying business over with so 
that she could join Robert in some celestial reunion. She 
couldn’t wait to get out of this world. 
Week after stubborn week Jay offered soup to her lips, 
watching for the smallest indication that his mother might 
discover some belated affection for her sole surviving son. But 
she seemed impervious to his presence, he could sit in the chair 
for hours while she stared at Robert propped in a silver frame 
on her bedside table. She couldn’t take her eyes off him, the 
dead son who could French-pleat her hair, who could play 
2 1 5 


PAGE 224:
Aifric Campbell 
exquisite Handel, she was always touching the things he 
touched, greedily gulping in his air, so that she often forgot the 
incidental fact of Jay’s existence, was startled when he spoke, as 
if he’d slashed through the umbilical cord that bound her to her 
firstborn. Jay felt the fierce heat of a love that would never be 
his, he knew the only alternative would be the negotiated love 
of the adult, all calculated compromise and reluctant trade-off, 
such a humiliating second-best. He had missed the opportunity 
of exclusive motherlove and was forever consigned to a life of 
correction, of making do, of gritting his teeth and learning to 
love his own inner child, inventing a fiction of self-worth that 
his own mother had never managed to discover. His entire life 
would be a protest against the scabrous mutant that he knew 
himself to be, concealed by the undergrowth of normality, 
camouflaged by his talent for observation and mimesis. 
For there really was a critical age for learning how to love. It 
was like language, which linguists have lately discovered will 
not develop spontaneously or correctly if the child is not 
exposed to speech before the onset of puberty. Something to 
do with the lateralisation of the brain. Robert had once told 
him the story of Genie, a girl in Los Angeles who had spent her 
entire life locked in a bedroom by her demented parents, so 
that, at an estimated age of eleven, it was already too late: 
Genie could learn to speak but the free gift of automatic 
linguistic expertise had been denied her by a childhood spent 
tied to a chair. And so it is with the unloved child, there is a cut¬ 
off point where what you have never learnt becomes an 
emotion that you can only imitate, you are forever denied the 
human experience. 
His mother dozed in the hospital bed, her breath snagging 
on some unwelcome half-dream and Jay wondered: who was 
she, this woman who bucked the biological trend? How did it 
happen? Did it creep up on her when his hungry infant cry 
2 1 6 


PAGE 225:
i Ht semantics of murder 
* 
shattered the humid dawn, did it slowly come into view as 
daylight sneaked under the curtain, illuminating the bundle in 
the crib that wouldn’t cease its fretful protest, the gap where 
love should have been, apparently all used up by Robert? 
Perhaps there isn’t always an unlimited supply. Of course, duty 
of care is a fine substitute, an admirable and noble alternative. 
But it is the most heinous of crimes, the failure to love. A 
crucial detail forgotten in the rush of event, in the press of 
living, a scarf dropped, a flower untended that grows but never 
blooms. Jay the choreographer, the voyeur, would be forever 
lying in the sagebrush, watching the business of life played out 
beneath him. 
He recalled an afternoon from long ago, his earliest 
conscious memory, when his mother stood in the kitchen with 
a bowl clasped to her hip, making cupcakes for Robert’s 
weekend visit. Jay spun a clattering top on the kitchen floor 
while she hummed, beating the mixture in uniform strokes, the 
colour warming her pale cheeks. Looking up from his toy, he 
was mesmerised by her beauty, by this vision of maternal 
splendour and he stepped closer to smell her vanilla-scented 
hair. A needlepoint desire crept over his skin right out into his 
fingertips as he reached out a shy hand to her apron, he craved 
the blissful touch of that flour-speckled palm that could 
smooth his brow, his heart, his entire life. She looked down 
when he pawed at her elbow, startled at the appearance of this 
three-year-old who nudged her with his mute demand and in 
that moment, Jay believed his mother could have changed the 
course of their history simply by gathering him into her arms 
and claiming him for her own. But reluctance stole like 
darkness across her face. ‘Get away now, shoo,’ she snapped, 
stepping quickly back. 'I’m baking for Robert,' and he shrank 
away, withdrew like a loathsome beast to the furthest 
outreaches of his cave. Now, fifty years later, this moment 
2 1 7 


PAGE 226:
Aifric Campbell 
returned to him in memory as his mother’s last chance. 
Jay shivered involuntarily, running a hand up and down his 
bloodless arm. My God, he thought, staring into the black 
gardens, he had been so utterly predictable in the end, acting 
out his childhood jealousy and rage against his mother. For of 
course his hands had really been around her neck, not Robert’s. 
A few days before she died, Jay’s mother had dispatched him to 
her Van Nuys duplex to get the pillbox and the gloves that she 
had worn when she boarded the Greyhound at Stockton back in 
1966. Death would spare her the indignity of extended old age 
with the son she despised, she would rejoin Robert in the 
heaven that she had always believed would be her birthright. So 
dying was a relief, a welcoming smile upon her lips and she 
wanted the gloves and the hat for this final journey. In the final 
thirty-six hours she was breathing through a tube; a soft-soled 
drift of nurses whisked through her doors to check her vital 
signs and offer a comforting word to Jay. As she got closer to 
the end he wished he could slow the process down, or at least 
get them to stop the pain relief so that he could deliver a 
crushing blow to her consciousness, that she might experience 
her own death. He stood resting his hands on the stiff-backed 
chair, watching her chest labour under the sheet, until a nurse 
slid a practised hand over her face and shut her eyes for the last 
time. His mother had finally left, taking everything with her, all 
the tidy details of her existence, closing the lid on a family that 
seemed now like such a nebulous concept. Jay patted her 
fingers as they lay cooling on the green bedspread. He had 
never dared touch her when she was alive. 
218 


PAGE 227:
• NINETEEN • 
On the street below, a car engine screeched in the chilled dense 
winter. Jay was suddenly exhausted, overwhelmed by memory 
and event. He looked at the manuscript on his desk, glowing in 
the darkness with deadly promise. ‘I. have written my best 
book,’ he whispered with a compensatory stretch of his wan 
lips. 'My work here is done.’ A police siren wailed in the 
distance and he turned his head to check the screen. 
Cora was still out there, they had not found her yet. 
He sank back into his armchair, head cradled in its high 
winged embrace and closed his eyes. It is true that the appetite 
becomes somewhat dulled for a life spent waiting for the sound 
of a ringing phone. 
In psychoanalysis, he reminded himself, there are only 
victims. If one was to apply the Hippocratic oath to Jay’s 
profession, or even to hold it axiomatic that all life is worth 
saving, he had undoubtedly been remiss in the line of duty. 
But what is an acceptable rate of attrition? Deaths in his care 
- at least those which he had counted - included Robert and 
perhaps five or six others towards whom his contribution 
could be considered significant. Those times, for instance, 
when he had simply grown weary of his clients’ sullen resist¬ 
ance and agreed that suicide was the only comfort left in their 
tormented world. He has been guilty of a failure to save, to 
grab the wheel and steer away from the rocks, to avert the 
disaster looming on a clear horizon. Like Cora just yesterday, 
2 1 9 


PAGE 228:
Aifric Campbell 
in flight from an irrefutable truth that he knew would surely 
destroy her. 
'Sometimes/ he told clients, ‘what frightens us most is that 
which is nameless.’ Jay understood the importance of 
nomenclature, how essential it was to be able to classify things. 
It is a process of demystification that creates the illusion of 
control. Clients seized on the cheap comfort he could offer with 
a professional diagnosis, their bright reassurance when he 
concluded, for example, 'You have obsessive compulsive 
disorder.’ It was apparently a relief to know that their condition 
was so well understood that it had an acronym. And they were 
often learned, worthy words, like ‘Anorexia nervosa’, such a 
wonderful term that called to mind a sharp and delicate flower. 
Or ‘Bulimia’, weighty and solid, thrives in shade. 
He remembered Susan, his bird-girl patient in December 
1983 and the inspiration for his first novel, how he had been 
fascinated by the changing landscape of her face as she grew 
rapidly thinner. The hysterical luminosity in her eyes was 
exaggerated by the gradual emergence of her cheekbones and a 
certain strictness about the chin. She was winter pale, almost 
translucent, her evangelical skin glowing with mysticism as she 
approached the delirium of her anorexic vision. A fierce and 
rampant energy was burning her up. Susan dreamt of herself as 
a swan in flight, her snow-white wings cutting a straight and 
powerful arc against a blue sky. She was flying towards her 
incineration. 
‘I feel so pure,’ she murmured and the expression on her 
face was the closest he had ever seen to what would be 
described as beatific. ‘Metacarsal,’ she whispered adoringly, 
stroking the spine of her mid-finger, for her anatomy was now 
all on proud display. ‘Phalanges,’ she continued, tracing a line 
out to the tip. She was hospitalised by this point, refusing food, 
and Jay had broken his own protocol by agreeing to see a client 
220 


PAGE 229:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
outside his safe space. A stricken gaggle of family hovered on 
the fringes and the consultant psychiatrist looked up in 
annoyance at the mention of an analyst, until he recognised 
Jay’s name and his sneering derision was replaced by a conspir¬ 
atorial welcome. 
‘Christ, I hate anorexics,’ he confided as they stood in the 
corridor looking out the window onto the car park and the 
multi-coloured shimmer of August rooftops. ‘They are so 
fucking committed.’ Jay thought of a painting he had once seen 
of a Bride of Christ, a fresh-faced novitiate in her mantilla’d 
anticipation, prostrating herself at the bishop’s feet so she 
might be penetrated by the mysteries of God. ‘We’re losing her, 
you know,’ the psychiatrist said. ‘I’ve had a parade of them 
recently.’ 
Some months earlier, after Susan had spent an entire 
session flicking through an insolent copy of Vogue, Jay decided 
to place a full-length mirror in front of the couch so that each 
time she came, she could dwell on the lake of her absorption 
and he could watch her eyes caress the approving jut of her 
collarbone. 
‘You are returning your body to its prepubescent state,’ he 
said. ‘I presume your periods have stopped?’ He invited Susan 
to take off her top and they sat in quiet contemplation of the 
bony torso of a frail overgrown child. The sagged pockets of her 
bra accommodated the ghost outline of a vanished woman¬ 
liness. She was slipping further and further back into a deadly 
recreation of the age of innocence. 
‘Anorexia-induced hypertrichosis,’ said Jay, as she examined 
her puny arm. ‘One of the unexplained side effects of your 
condition.’ She looked up, puzzled. ‘Your entire body is covered 
in down.’ He leaned forward and pointed to the carpet of 
unpigmented hairs that provided a fuzzy halo to the white skin 
of her forearm. ‘You are turning into a monkey.’ 
22 1 


PAGE 230:
Aifric Campbell 
‘I don’t see it,’ she glared at him. 
‘Soon you will have a beard,’ he added, resettling in his 
chair. Susan turned her unseeing eyes back to the mirror. 
She persisted in her fierce attempt to win his admiration for 
her achievement, she liked to wear her tightest latex top to 
accentuate her skeletal torso. He saw that she was full of glory; 
it was a sort of transcendesence, like the woman who lovingly 
straps a belt of explosives around her chest and steps into a 
sunlit square, bathed in the radiant vision of martyrdom. The 
onlookers gasp in horror and blunder about in a panicked 
meddling. But this was choice. The misery was all for the 
audience. Susan was in love with withholding. She would 
celebrate her specialness by refusing all sustenance so that she 
could remain in a permanent state of agonising desire. Jay 
didn’t hold with the feminists’ explanation of anorexia as 
gender fear, denial of womanhood, starvation as destruction. It 
was all about control. 
The ward was a parade of mental health professionals 
feeding on the curious manifestations of their patients. They 
gathered in clustered conference around the water cooler as if 
they were in the hushed presence of the saintly, believing they 
could detect a kind of heroism in the distorted thought patterns 
of slow and deliberate starvation. Jay laughed out loud when he 
overheard a psychotherapist whisper that it was a humbling 
experience to work with eating disorders, that it brought you so 
close to the fundamental question of life and death. 
In early September, he sat by Susan’s bedside marvelling at a 
web of blue veins sketched underneath the waxen surface of 
her skin. She lay asleep, or feigning sleep, earplugged to Stevie 
Nicks, the companion she had adopted as a bedfellow in the 
last stages of malnutrition. 
‘Why not kill yourself quickly?’ he asked when her mother 
went for tea. 
222 


PAGE 231:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
f 
‘Do you think you should be saying that to someone in my 
condition?’ she said, tremulous but aroused. 
‘I’m just curious to know why you chose a slow death rather 
than, say, sleeping pills?’ 
Susan chewed a grey lip, picked at her bitten nails, so soft 
now they sometimes fell off without her noticing. Her sister 
had collared him in the elevator the previous day, asked him if 
they should explore the idea of shock tactics. Pictures of 
Auschwitz victims, that sort of thing. 
‘I think it’s because you want us all to watch your grand 
finale. The romance of dying in front of an audience.’ 
The bitten lip trembled and Susan’s huge eyes filled with 
tears. 
‘You think it’s like Swan Lake?’ he said. ‘But the swan, like 
Juliet and Cleopatra and all your other heroines, they were 
beautiful in death. You will die ugly. A malnourished corpse.’ 
He patted her bones. ‘Is that romantic? Is that glamorous?’ 
A febrile silence enveloped the bedside. 
‘I assume you’ve given some consideration to the funeral 
arrangements. You wouldn’t want the occasion to be ruined by 
lack of planning.’ A complicit grin spread across her receding 
gums. ‘Actually,’ she said. ‘I’ve made a list.' 
The image of her grieving mother at the funeral excited 
her, it was almost sexual, the idea of weeping relatives. She 
knew the songs they would sing, of course, for she had 
orchestrated the entire event. They would finally know they 
hadn’t loved her enough, hadn’t appreciated her impossible 
uniqueness while she was alive and so she would give them 
something unforgettable by offering up the enforced spectacle 
of her death. Her family floundered for an explanation that 
could accommodate this behaviour: Was it a joint she had 
when she was sixteen? Was it drugs, Mr Hamilton, do you 
think? Was it bullying at school? Was it her younger brother 
223 


PAGE 232:
Aifric Campbell 
being born when she was only thirteen months old? What did 
we do to deserve this? 
Jay returned one last time to the hospital where Susan’s 
mother dozed in her vigil armchair. She woke with a gasp, 
shifted into a continuous rocking motion, clutching the 
drooping rosary beads and resumed her incantation in the half 
gloom. Susan’s hand was green in the subdued light, her 
eyelids flickering in a cadaverous sleep. A white cotton 
nightgown revealed the razor edge of her clavicle and her head 
seemed to have shrunk so that even her short hair looked like 
an over-sized wig. 
She weighed thirty-eight kilos when she died. The gravedig¬ 
gers tugged in disbelief as they hoisted the ropes under her 
adult coffin. In the early years. Jay used to attend funerals of 
dead clients, a sort of after-sales service, a deferential nod to 
the relatives of the lost souls, but he found they clung too fast 
to him - the parents and the siblings and friends, all scrabbling 
to erase the burden of responsibility, trying to bury the grief 
and anger in the choking wet earth. He stood slightly aside 
under a malignant yew and imagined Susan dragging her 
emaciated form through the wood of the suicides, her family 
howling with pain from the fringes. Then he turned on his heel 
and walked away. 
The phone rang with a shrill urgency that reverberated through 
the house. Jay opened his eyes on the darkness and slid his arm 
along the wing of the chair, struggling to keep hold of the 
dream trace before it slipped into hidden recesses, like a silver- 
side fish plunging to the murky depths. His fingertips 
massaged the crackling ridges at the base of his neck. The 
screen glow behind him reflected his faint outline in the French 
windows. A face in black water, eaten away by shadow, almost 
224 


PAGE 233:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
formless. This is how he has always seen himself, of course - 
half-made. 
The phone rang off and he swivelled his chair slowly round 
to his laptop where the news scroll read: 
22:52 BABY CHRISTOPHER FOUND SAFE AND WELL IN 
THE CAR PARK OF A LONDON HOSPITAL 
Now it was just a question of waiting for Cora to be found 
and this wouldn't take long. Jay knew exactly where she was. 
His head sank back into the armchair and he drifted into a 
half-dream where he was just south of Calgary, 800 miles from 
his destination, looking down from 36,000 feet at a mono¬ 
chrome landscape of snowy peaks, broken only by a ribbon of 
frozen river that stretched away into the desolate peaks of the 
Clearwater Mountains. The white range was choked with trees 
and through the patchy cloud he could see a long straight road 
connecting a sparse habitation with a distant somewhere. A 
perfect triplet of S-bends gorged on hundreds of miles of 
bankside, eventually disappearing into the velvet black ice of an 
oxbow lake. Spokane’s flattened grid lay frozen below him, the 
straight confident lines of the interstate smoothing the 
whimsical twist of the Purcell River. The town melted away into 
a level snow plain and a heavenly purity of sky with the faintest 
suggestion of crescent moon fading into the graduated blue. 
A woman in the seat behind him muttered, Think howr 
beautiful it must be in springtime.’ Stray cloud wisps hung on 
the horizon like so many smoke fires and beyond, Canada fell 
away into unbroken snow. 
A car engine roared and screeched to a sudden halt on the 
street outside and Jay shuddered, opening his eyes to a strobe 
of blue light in the window. A door slammed and the intercom 
buzzed. Jay nodded gravely as the world sprang into life on his 
case. He struggled on the edge of his waking dream, but he 
225 


PAGE 234:
Aifric Campbell 
didn’t move, closed his eyes again and let the pulsing light play 
behind his lids. 
It was one hour and thirty-two minutes to San Francisco 
with a 15 mile-an-hour tail wind and another life. He felt the 
chill of an empty homecoming, a remembered scattering of 
connections long since lost. Perhaps he would rent a car and 
drive clear to the ocean, walk out into the air and a time before 
all that, a moment barely remembered where Robert had driven 
his mother and himself to the Big Sur. Jay was four or five, 
young enough to be confused by the fuzzy family boundaries 
between much-older brother and absent father. He knelt alone 
with bucket and spade as a giant sun sank into the orange sea 
and the shadows of his mother and Robert on the sand glowed 
immobile, his head in her lap, both of them staring out on a 
blissful burnt horizon. 
The dream shimmered and re-formed, swooping down to 
the fourth grade classroom where Jay sits tracing the wooden 
grooves of his desktop with a pencil. Miss Purdy reads aloud 
into the hush, a solitary tear rolls down the shiny curve of her 
cheek, the little girls in pigtails are sobbing too at the fate of the 
brave little swallow who grew to love the Happy Prince and 
could not abandon him when winter came. Jay looks up from 
the desk, awestruck by the powerful tentacles of love. Think to 
have inspired that, to have known oneself to be the object of an 
irrational and glorious desire, the source and the instrument of 
love, a thing of beauty. The dream clouds and crumbles, leaving 
a foul taste in the pit of his mouth. It has been so profoundly 
disappointing to be an observer of the human experiment, to 
see so clearly and to be so unmoved. Beating out a shout that 
echoes unanswered and forever in a dark cave, a yearning for 
pain, the chance to feel, for a life to be driven by passions so 
fully regarded. That Jay once longed for all of this was perhaps 
the measure of his humanity. The only mystery, the Happy 
226 


PAGE 235:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
Prince and the leaden heart that would never melt. 
The buzzer screamed on the fringes of his consciousness but 
Jay sank back into remembrance and dream. He did not believe 
you could mourn the unknown. Time passed, the drift 
backwards was too pressing, he felt a swift air current fraught 
with danger and he needed to land this flight. When he thought 
of Robert it was increasingly in the younger years, although he 
knew this was a futile effort to retreat to a time of innocence 
that proved impossible to recall without a sense of violation. 
There was a persistent hammering in the background that 
seemed to reach deep down inside his ear and he struggled at 
the edge of waking but was catapulted from the classroom to a 
vision of Larry, sprawled on the couch in his crumpled suit, 
much as Cora did last night. A lifetime ago. Larry’s mouth lies 
agape in an open drool and he twitches, making little mewling 
distress calls and Jay takes refuge in Larry’s black-and-white 
graveside fantasy, where a herd of umbrella’d mourners stand 
behind him on the drenched grass; his hands are clasped in 
front while the rain streams over his face. The image wobbles 
uncertainly and Larry stirs on the couch, perhaps something 
private would be more appropriate, like a quick cremation, 
although he cannot for the life of him think where to scatter the 
ashes. Never mind, never mind, a cab arrives, he can hear the 
engine, its open trunk swallows his suitcases and he slides into 
the back seat of a relocation and a new life which will not 
include the distressing memory of an abducting wife. We can 
wipe out selectively and reinvent. Larry will propel himself 
forwards and take shelter in a new fiction. 
Jay’s head lolled deep in the armchair’s embrace, willing 
himself back into his own dream where he begins the descent 
to San Francisco. In the porthole window the view gives way to 
a slow creep of colour, matt brown and dark green on the 
mountain ridges that form a loose protective arc around the 
227 


PAGE 236:
Aifric Campbell 
northside of the city. The inland waterways are a pale grey, the 
snow-less plains a dull brown with the lightest scattering of 
grass. And everywhere the approaching footprint of habitation. 
He flies over a soft burst of low hills, dried mud slopes like 
scooped-out moulds, and into the first glimpse of the Bay area, 
where hidden communities nestle shyly in the dips. A 
geography that cannot decide if it should be land or water, 
procrastinating over its identity. He sees the first car since 
leaving there twenty years ago, cutting a slow trail along a 
hilltop road. It seems he is going back to school, some crucial 
class that he missed on Sutter Street. Metzling is waiting, 
stroking a long white beard that lends him a wizardly gravitas. 
The group is assembled in a silent seated circle, there is 
Angeline with a mane of grey curls, rimless glasses balanced 
on a crumpled nose, beckoning a bangled hand. The class lifts 
their solemn faces towards him. They want to know what Jay 
has to say. 
The white surf crashes all along the shore as he flies along 
the south side of the Golden Gate. The wing dips and an aerial 
ugliness fills his window as they veer over freeways thick with 
traffic and a dense grey housing grid behind an angular 
harbour. He watches the plane’s shadow, a faint moving blob 
keeping pace on the flat shallow sea where the water just skims 
the seabed. A last skywards lurch over the protective cradle of 
the mountain range, over sectioned brown sea fields, currents 
rippling like oil slicks across the surface. It all feels like an 
extravaganza, a circus show and not a landing, like a stripper 
who bares all and kills the suspense. The wheels lower, 
juddering over a shore-side golf course and an orderly marina 
where a dark grove of trees dip into the water. A startled cluster 
of waders huddle in the shallows like a gaggle of nervous 
children. Jay’s throat is cabin dry, his ankles bitten by the cruel 
heels of shoes that were a perfect fit just hours ago. 
228 


PAGE 237:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
The wing flaps spring up, a rushed sway announces the 
landing, the heavy thud of footsteps on his stairs and Jay 
momentarily loses concentration, flips open his eyes and the 
gaping emptiness of his life leaves him gasping for air. 


PAGE 238:


PAGE 239:
• APPENDIX • 
CORA 
Fragment of an analysis of a case of childlessness* 
J. Merritt 
December 1999 
* unpublished 


PAGE 240:
\ 


PAGE 241:
Cora Miller had an affair. 
She got found out, was dragged from her bed in the early 
hours of a hot August night and spilled the beans. Or rather 
they were slapped out of her. 
Her husband was not a dangerous man, not at all given to 
violent outbursts. He’d got through college without ever 
getting in a fight but that was what had made it worse: what 
she had done, how she had wounded him, how the mitigating 
circumstance wasn't mitigating in the face of his howling pain. 
Cora knew she was lucky to be alive, fingertips exploring her 
burnt cheek while her husband puked up in the ensuite. 
Overcome by what he had heard, what he had done. She stared 
at her cheating reflection in the full-length mirror, her bare 
browned legs poking out from underneath an outsize T-shirt, 
and then she fled downstairs, grabbed the car keys and 
disappeared. 
But she didn’t take the baby. 
Months later, even when it was clear that Cora wasn’t coming 
back, that was pretty much all anyone ever said. Her husband 
said I can’t believe she didn’t take the baby. Her mum said, I do NOT 
believe she didn’t take that baby, who was asleep at the time in the 
cot in the next room, his nappy ballooning in a wet sag. And 
years later the baby himself, who grew up to be an unemployed 
teacher prone to binge drinking and infrequent showering, 
would say I cannot fucking believe she didn’t take me with her. 
233 


PAGE 242:
Aifric Campbell 
So what was going through Cora’s mind that night? She had 
a cut lip. This was what she noticed as she sped through 
darkness, flicking her tongue over the salt dryness. Not crying 
now, just fleeing from what was inside, checking the rear-view 
mirror for some invisible pursuer. It wasn’t until she screeched 
to a halt in an unlit lay-by to pull on jeans and trainers that she 
saw the empty car seat with a little teddy dangling from one 
arm and she remembered she had forgotten the baby. She 
staggered out of the car into the watery glow of the headlights, 
heard a rustling sound in the crusted litter heaped by the 
roadside and looked down at the flutter of a small blackbird 
perched on a broken bottle, a worm wriggling in its orange 
beak. Impossible, she squeezed her eyes, for she knew that 
birds are not nocturnal hunters and when she looked again it 
had vanished. Odd, all the same, how trivia can intrude on a 
critical moment. 
Cora drove on. Because once you start running the problem 
can be how to stop and the tank was full, it was an effortless 
automatic drive and she was only a few hundred yards from a 
slip road to a motorway that went fifty miles south in an 
irregular line to the coast. There are no hold-ups at 2 am. 
Of course there was never going to be any satisfactory way 
of explaining all this to the Growing-Up Baby, except to say 
that his mother had just left, which worked fine in the early 
years when he was young enough to believe this was normal 
mother behaviour, but took on a whole new meaning when he 
hit double digits. Years later Cora’s husband realised that he 
should have told his son his mother was dead, then the Grown- 
Up Baby wouldn’t have had the excuse of maternal rejection 
that he said blighted his entire life, sapped him of ambition and 
rendered him unable to form lasting relationships with girls. 
He didn’t think his beer-soaked impotence was a factor, or his 
lapses in personal hygiene, but even if they had been, that was 
234 


PAGE 243:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
his mother’s fault too, for destroying his sense of self-worth, 
although he couldn’t remember a single thing about her because 
he was only ten months old on that August night when his 
world stopped turning, which was how he was inclined to think 
of it, as he nursed a bewildered bitterness over his brooding 
beer. 
But at least Cora’s husband had a happy ending, he got a lot 
of casseroles and mothering, more than he ever believed existed 
and they did actually help to lessen the blow of desertion and 
heal his wounded pride. He sorted a complicated timetable 
around his mum and a nanny to look after the baby while he 
went out to work, honed his story down to a romantic saga of 
self-sacrifice. Everyone was very impressed with his coping 
skills, like he was a hero for not abandoning the child as well. 
But men always get a medal for sticking with a messy domestic 
situation. For that one time they don’t behave like cunts. 
And it turned out that there was plenty of upside. He was a 
walking babe magnet down the weekend playground, what 
with his story and the baby who had a small scar on his cheek 
from where he had fallen off a swing when his father was 
reading the newspaper, but it was that very accident that 
introduced Cora’s husband to a recent divorcee in the sandpit, 
who knew all about abandonment and could tell him not to 
bother with stitches (head wounds always look worse than they 
are), and nine months later they moved in together and had 
two kids in rapid succession: boys who didn’t grow up 
impotent and took a keen interest in personal hygiene. 
In Cora’s husband’s version of the story, he doesn't actually 
give her a slap. In fact when he thinks about it now (which is 
not often and usually for some reason when he’s stuck in 
home-flow traffic in fading summer evenings), he finds himself 
rewinding further, to an earlier point in the story: to the 
morning he and Cora were getting married and he stood on the 
235 


PAGE 244:
Aifric Campbell 
steps of Chelsea Town Hall with his best man (in an agony of 
not smoking, but it seemed wrong not to wait until after the 
ceremony). He saw the white ribboned limo pull up and 
watched Cora get out and, even though he knew she was a 
vision of loveliness in that short sea-blue dress, her straight 
brown knees bending athletically as she smiled her way up 
towards him, even at that very moment, he still managed to 
wonder if this, in fact, was their high point, if it would be 
downhill all the way from here. He shifted one leg, loosening 
his dick inside his suit. 
Later, maybe two years later, he was squatting down on the 
third green to fish a ball out of the hole and he said to his best 
man, who was also his best friend, Sometimes I wonder if that’s it, 
you know. The best man grinned, he was a whole year and two 
children wiser, Wait till you start the school fees, mate. 
That night they stayed up drinking shots while Cora 
flickered through REM sleep in her pregnant sea of pillows, 
dreaming she was building sandcastles on a Long Island beach. 
Downstairs, her husband and the best man leaned two full 
heads of hair back into their armchairs and listened to Thunder 
Road’. 
They were thirty-one and just getting comfortable with 
cliche. 
But let’s return to that August night and Cora gripping the 
steering wheel, blinking into the darkness. She had seen Thelma 
and Louise and was occasionally given to headscarf fantasies 
about open-topped cars and girlish death pacts and if she’d had 
another sinner in the car she might have done a similar thing. 
(Women make such expert victims. They’ve had thousands of 
years to perfect the skill.) It was panic that had made her leave 
without the baby, but it was guilt that would keep her away, 
236 


PAGE 245:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
something Cora realised even as she cut through the night: this 
would be her punishment. There were easier options, of course: 
she could throw herself off a bridge, slash her wrists in the 
toilets of a service station, smash the car into a brick wall, but 
none of these seemed appropriate and so, as she stared out of 
the windscreen and dawn stole over the South Coast, Cora 
resolved to choose the slow burn inferno of all maternal 
purgatories: Giving Up My Baby. 
Tell me, why would a person do such a terrible thing? she asked at our 
first meeting. This was almost nine years after that August 
night and Cora sat on the edge of the Corbusier, picking at her 
cuticles. I need to understand how this could happen, she said, a 
single tear rolling down her cheek. 
For three decades now clients have beaten a path to my 
door: the twitching obsessives, the over-compensating mother- 
haters, the compulsive hand-washers, the tearful comfort- 
eaters, the tranquilised depressed - they bring me the gift of 
their pasts, like returning cats dropping dead trophies at their 
owners' feet. And I can assure you that if listening to people’s 
couch-ridden misery teaches you anything, it is that you will 
never find the true beginning to the story of a life, no matter 
how far back you go. Nothing can be satisfactorily explained. 
No one is ever cured of their own life. 
Of course, my colleagues would not agree. They would 
encourage you to mine the past at £60 an hour for the clues 
that lie embedded in your childhood, they would have you 
believe there is some scientific method in this retreat into 
fantasy and dream, excavating fragments of personal history 
which you piece together to fashion a whole. I tell you now that 
it is the scam of the century - we are a profession of liars and 
cheats descended from the greatest illusionist of them all, for 
237 


PAGE 246:
Aifric Campbell 
even after years of stuttering through the half-remembered 
fictions of your life, you will still be no closer to the truth you 
sought: how it began; who you are. 
Cora progressed from the Corbusier to the couch but she 
was not satisfied with me, she wanted her past transposed into 
an extravagant storyboard with the reassurance of plot. Like 
you, the reader, who demands a story, a reason to turn the page, 
she wanted an ending so that there could be a beginning. I 
could have told her that such a scrabble for coherence is like 
baying to false gods in the moonlight, clinging fast to the belief 
that there is a meaning lurking in all this human disarray. But 
the customer is always right and an analyst grows weary of 
endless variations on the same theme, so, eventually, I 
complied. I gave Cora the explanation she wanted and an idea 
of how she might develop her plot. And although she left 
before we were finished, I think you’ll agree that she 
understood exactly what kind of ending her story would 
require. 
Cora was predisposed to guilt. It jangled in her like the coins 
she stole from the classroom money box for starving children 
in Biafra when she was seven years old, the spoils hidden in the 
belly of her pyjama dog and discovered by her mother while she 
was changing the sheets. Her father’s stern silence was 
deafening when he lifted her skirt and spanked her bottom but 
her sobbing didn’t stop her mother’s flamboyant production of 
the stolen goods when she marched her daughter into the 
headmistress’s office. Cora confessed her crime, was named 
and shamed in front of the class on the first Friday of the month 
(Catholics, you see, they know how to do these things), and 
this public humiliation laid a trail of shame that snaked 
through her life, clung to her clothes like a rancid smell, you 
238 


PAGE 247:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
could see its trace in the little things she did and it was, she 
told me, the collection box theft that she was remembering as 
her car sliced through that August night. It didn’t matter that 
her rational brain said. Fucking hell, Cora, if that’s your biggest 
crime, stealing money from a collection box when you were in third 
class, Jesus. Get over it. 
Now the robbing was crowded out by her new big crime - 
infidelity and there wasn’t room in her seeping conscience for 
two sins. She’d had years of intimacy with the hellfire of guilt 
and even though there was a context to the betrayal (husband 
had a post-natal fling the previous year), Cora knew that didn’t 
absolve her, for there had been a moment six months before 
when all of this could have been avoided, that moment when 
she’d plucked at a speared olive and a voice said, I thought only 
people in James Bond movies drank martini, and Cora smiled up at 
the Other who was standing there, suddenly looking like Sean 
Connery’s fucking double, and she wondered why she’d never 
noticed this before, was it because they had grown so used to 
the professionalism of each other’s collegiate presence after 
seven years of career-sharing office space with a thousand other 
drones, the corporate album of highs and lows? There was 
nothing new in what he’d said or what she’d said, it was just 
the way that the smoked glass behind the bar reflected the 
possibility of a break in the monotonous glamour of their 
predictable young lives and marked the end of the unsung, 
unphotographed story of good working relationships that don’t 
always end in tears, that often end in dinner parties every 
quarter and playmate provision for the kids. 
You see the danger. The shark in the dark waters. Why some 
men feel compelled to lock their women away in a pre-emptive 
strike, why others cover their women up in a black shroud and 
say they’re just following Allah’s instructions. 
By the time her husband found out, the affair was over but 
239 


PAGE 248:
Aifric Campbell 
that didn’t matter to Cora. How she thought: just because 
we’re not still gassing Jews doesn’t mean the Holocaust is over. 
Which might give you some kind of insight into her firefly 
thought patterns. She knew that things don’t just end because 
there’s nothing actually happening, when the screen goes 
blank, the lights go up and everybody’s rushing for the exit. 
Nothing ends, even when you die. 
A couple of weeks before she disappeared, Cora walked into 
a bookshop to kill an hour and picked up a self-help manual 
where a therapist was quoted on infidelity: the screwing you get is 
not worth the screwing you get. The book leapt from her hands 
back onto the shelf and she hurried off to the parenting section 
to find something reinforcing, reminding herself that there 
were other things going on in the world that were important. 
Like the massacres in the Congo or genetically modified crops 
and why nobody seemed to care, but she couldn’t get the book 
out of her head, she was back in the guilt loop again and she ran 
from the shop and hailed a passing cab, leaned her head back as 
they rolled along Park Lane, stared at the hotel facades. No, it’s 
never over. It will always be there in the space between us. The lie, the 
betrayal wedged in between Cora and her husband on the 
couch as they share a late glass of wine, listening to the baby 
snuffling through the monitor. Guilt was the hidden text in 
what she did, the choreographer of her days. 
So let’s fast-forward now, seven years from that August night 
where we find Cora in Greenwich, Connecticut with her new 
husband Larry, a broker at Merrill Lynch who met her shortly 
after his first wife traded down to a local real estate broker who 
did a brisk trade in upmarket clapboards. Listen to the hush at 
the dinner table while Cora shares her true life-story with her 
new’ best friends, a story that has somehow (she’s not sure 
240 


PAGE 249:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
exactly how she did this) morphed into a candlelit tearjerker 
about being kicked out in the middle of the night and a 
torturous custody battle. The women shake their yawning 
heads as their midnight tyres crunch home over the frozen 
snow and Cora drifts into sleep, almost remembering exactly 
which outfit she wore to the carefully orchestrated legal 
proceedings of her fantasy past. 
Sometimes, standing by the mirror on late afternoons, she 
runs a hand over her slim-hipped profile and wonders if she has 
in fact given birth at all, or if that too was part of someone 
else’s life. 
Larry B. Olsen, her new husband, is not at all partial to 
pasts, he prefers to deal with things that he can see and touch. 
He is at best incurious about Cora’s first marriage, preferring to 
imagine her on emotional life-support until she met him. 
Estrangement doesn’t faze him in the slightest since his own 
child (a slight six-year-old boy from an early mistake-marriage) 
lives in California now and Larry finds the emotional pain of 
severance a whole lot more bearable than the alimony. 
Fast-forward another year to the dry spring night when 
everything is set to change: Larry bursts through the front door 
with a bottle of Bollinger and a wild grin and tells Cora that he 
has taken a promotion in the London office - not an obvious 
move at all - ‘But hey, honey, I’m thirty-nine and this is a once 
in a lifetime chance,’ and she knows resistance would be futile 
and finding a third husband would only be harder at thirty-six- 
and-a-half, despite the slim hips, so she consoles herself by 
believing it might be just for a couple of years. 
The trouble starts already in the holding pattern over 
Heathrow when Cora calculates that The Baby would be nearly 
nine by now. She looks out into dense cloud and wonders if he 
ever looks at photos of her, although she’s pretty certain he 
doesn’t have any, from the tone of her first husband’s last letter 
24 1 


PAGE 250:
Aifric Campbell 
six years ago where he wrote that his second wife is the mother 
Cora had never been and that he would fight her tooth and nail 
if she EVER EVER tried to come crawling back begging for 
custody. Or even access. You are the most selfish person 1 have ever 
known, he said, and Cora was actually relieved that someone 
had finally confirmed this ugly truth. But as the cab inches 
towards the Chiswick roundabout in the afternoon rush hour, 
she is pitched forward, doubled up by a desperate ache in the 
pit of her stomach that radiates out across her whole body and 
Larry tells the cab to pull over, but when Cora staggers out onto 
a garage forecourt she realises the ache is an overwhelming 
desire to hold her little boy in her arms, to hold him forever and 
ever and ever, to never let him go. For seven years she’s been 
absolutely fine, thrived on her self-imposed punishment but it 
turns out now that all she wants is to have a baby, her heart is 
crying out for it, she absolutely must have a baby, it is life or 
death, and nothing will ever be the same again. 
Nine months, three specialists, three D&Cs and three 
laparoscopies later, Cora is struggling to ignore the breaking 
news that there is a problem with her tubes, a problem with her 
hormones in the dark brown phial of blood, a problem, in fact, 
with her entire reproductive system. But she carries on using 
ovulation sticks every day, just in case medical science is wrong 
(you never know, she’d read an article once about a girl who 
swore she’d conceived two years after pretty much everyone on 
Harley Street had confirmed her infertility), and Cora isn’t 
going to let some doctor have the last say, she’s too busy to 
even eat in between her acupuncture and massage and tai chi 
and thinking-yourself-pregnant classes, as well as the IVF 
cycles that Larry notices are all beginning to add up, although 
he’s quietly confident about a generous bonus at year end. 
‘Just remember, honey, it’s fine by me if we don’t have any,’ 
he says by her bedside, because Mr Farrakheem told him, while 
242 


PAGE 251:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
Cora slept off the anaesthetic, that it’s important she comes 
round to the overwhelming likelihood of a negative outcome. 
Three days later they have their final consultation. A Mont 
Blanc sits fatly on Farrakheem’s desk, gold cap glinting. Cora 
counts two or three distinct offspring sealed inside the silver 
photo frames. 
‘I am ha-fraid,’ Mr Farrakheem raises his head from her file, 
eyes like polished marbles. Larry pats her hand. She would like 
to sink her teeth into his comforting flesh. 
‘Heuw see here,’ says Mr Farrakheem, tapping the little box 
that squats beside his desk. Frozen on the screen is the wedge- 
shaped blur of Cora’s redundant ovaries. 
She sits, a bright blinking smile fixed on her lips while Mr 
Farrakheem outlines the boundless extent of her reproductive 
failure. She bolsters herself sideways against the chair, feels the 
tenderness in the top of her thigh, a watery purple bruising 
from the daily hormone injections that she administers with an 
autogun sitting on the edge of the bath. 
‘So you would advise—’ prompts Larry. He leans forward, 
pursing his lips at the grey screen. Cora thinks of his ties 
colour-filed in the wardrobe. 
‘There hees noh-point. Hany-more,’ says Farrakheem, 
patting the closed file. ‘So very sorry, Meesus Olsen.’ 
‘Miller,’ she says with a sharpness that jabs Larry’s ear. 
Mr Farrakheem nods his head at a gracious incline. ‘Mee- 
ler,’ he soothes as if humouring a petulant child. Cora would 
like to rip his tongue from his mouth but a carriage clock on the 
mantelpiece indicates she is out of time. 
She rises but does not take the hand that Farrakheem offers, 
she lets Larry guide her elbow across the plush expanse of 
carpet, looks up at the dizzy height of ceiling, and gasps at the 
flutter of a black wing in the corner. The receptionist spins 
round but Larry nudges Cora forward, down the sweeping 
243 


PAGE 252:
Aifric Campbell 
stairs, past the waiting-room where the door gapes open on a 
limbo of women perched on stiff-backed chairs and a photo 
montage of all the chubby-cheeked babies who owe their 
existence to Mr Farrakheem’s wizardry. 
They emerge into a sunless noon. Larry puts his arm around 
her shoulders and presses her close on the corner of 
Devonshire and Harley Street, startled by the slightness of her 
frame (how slender she's grown all of a sudden, he thinks, how 
disposable). He leaves a curt message at the office and decides 
on consolation lunch at San Lorenzo where he suggests a skiing 
trip in the New Year and tries not to be put off by the fact that 
Cora doesn’t seem to even notice that he is talking, but is 
staring somewhere beyond his shoulder into the oblique view 
of rainy Beauchamp Place. 
And it is shortly after this that the blackbird business starts up. 
What begins as a throwaway remark from Cora quickly blossoms 
into the conviction that the birds are predatory, (they have live 
worms wriggling in their beaks) and they have, according to 
her, found a way into their Battersea house (the attic? the Velux 
windows? the back door?). They appear on the bedroom sill in 
the early morning and their tremulous song can, she insists, be 
heard all over the house, although whenever Larry, or the 
cleaning lady or any one of their diminishing circle of new¬ 
found friends between the Commons call round to visit, the 
birds are nowhere to be seen. Of course people understand it is 
a phobia, but that doesn't mean it isn’t extremely tiresome and 
after all there is only so much you say to a woman who is more 
interested in surveying her house for birds than having a chat. 
By December, however, things seem to have stabilised. Cora 
is unusually inert at home, spending a good hour over a cup of 
tea in bed in the morning according to the cleaner, but Larry 
244 


PAGE 253:
THE SEMANTICS OF MURDER 
takes this as a good sign after her months of restlessness - it is 
a change in pattern - maybe it’s the medication finally kicking 
in. Gradually her inertia gives way to walks on Wandsworth 
Common, which everyone agrees is a healthy sign. She takes 
the same route every day, across the narrow railway bridge that 
stinks of fox piss, cutting along the eastern border of the 
stagnant lake, past the little playground where she always 
stops, even when there is no one there, and that’s how she sees 
a little toddler bash its forehead on a swing. 
Cora’s heart goes out to him (- or her - you can’t always be 
sure in the winter at that age, and It is wearing a woolly hat) 
and the Spanish nanny seems so stressed, with another infant 
bawling in the pram, that Cora opens the gate, offers to help, 
amuses the little boy - for It was a He - makes him smile by 
pulling faces and singing a bright song that she has dredged up 
from her own maternal pre-history. Juanita rubs her gloveless 
hands and laughs at his tearful recovery, turning back to the 
infant, struggling with the Tupperware container inside the 
baby bag underneath the Silver Swan (so impractical but Alicia 
insists on it, although she's back at work now and of course not 
the one who is hiking it round the Common in mid-winter). By 
the time the bottle is inserted into the baby’s screeching lips 
and Juanita turns round, her toddler charge has vanished and 
with him the friendly woman. 
Cora has swept him up into her arms, he was irresistible 
with his big brown eyes all glittery with tears, so like (she told 
herself) what the Old Baby, the Original Baby had been (golden 
curls, strawberry cheeks) and of course she knows EXACTLY 
what he wants, what he wants is a big teddy with a green bow 
like the one she’s seen in the window of ‘Daisy & Tom' on the 
King’s Road so she packs him into the back of the SUV, 
thinking how ironic that she never drove one in all the years in 
Connecticut. She’s a little concerned that she doesn't have a 
245 


PAGE 254:
Aifric Campbell 
child seat but it isn’t far to drive at high spinning speed, away 
from the Spanish nanny and her trembling disbelief, marooned 
in the playground for a full minute before she even remembers 
her mobile phone but she can’t operate the speed dial and her 
English, which is elementary at the best of times, has vanished, 
and she needs the assistance of a dog walker who arrives on the 
scene and can quickly and practically help her call the police. 
Well, you could write the rest of the script now for there are 
usually only two likely outcomes in this kind of case. We don’t 
need to dwell on Larry’s shock when he takes the call on the 
trading floor at Merrill Lynch or indeed his whisky vigil at 
home, waiting for Cora to end this madness and come home. 
He listens to the police alerts that reveal her identity by the 
following morning using the portrait photo he gave them (her 
favourite suit already looking a little loose around the 
waistband), his speechless new friends who share an 
uncomfortable drink before sloping off with the redundant 
promise of their support through the forty-eight hour hell 
which finally ends with the pale faces of Detective Matthews 
and WPC Fletching in his living room, telling Larry that the 
toddler has been left in the A&E Department at the Chelsea 
and Westminster hospital and he is absolutely fine, nothing 
wrong with him whatsoever and that Cora has also been found, 
although - eh - not with the baby. And even though they are 
speaking very slowly, it takes a while for Larry to understand 
that when the Detective says ‘hanging from a tree in Hyde 
Park’, this means that Cora is actually dead and has been since 
the early hours, found at dawn by a traumatised joggejy 
‘So you see, Larry,’ says WPC Fletching, pabmg his^n^ 
‘your wife didn’t mean the baby any harm in thesfend.’ 


PAGE 255:


PAGE 256:


PAGE 257:
In memory of Kate Jones who died on 1 February 2008 


PAGE 258:
\ 
• ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS • 
The Semantics of Murder was inspired by the life and work of Richard 
Montague and supported with assistance from the Arts and 
Humanities Research Council and the James & Sylvia Thayer Fellowship 
at the University of California at Los Angeles. 
The text includes extracts from unpublished archived material at 
UCLA and also from the Los Angeles Department of Coroner official 
records relating to the murder of Richard Montague. 
I am especially grateful to Cindy Newsome and staff at the Special 
Collections Library at UCLA, the LA Coroner’s Office and Detective 
Jose Ramirez of the LAPD who handled the Montague case when it 
was re-investigated by the Cold Case Unit. Thanks to Jeannette and 
Rob Appleby for their hospitality during my time in LA. For generous 
and invaluable assistance with advice and corrections to the US 
edition, I am indebted to Professor Emerita Barbara Partee, University 
of Massachusetts Amherst, Professor Larry Horn, Yale, Professor Kai 
von Fintel, MIT and Professor Barbara Abbott, Michigan State. 
The transformational tree in Chapter 6 is based on a version 
included in Introduction to Montague Semantics by David R. Dowty, 
Robert E. Wall and Stanley Peters (Holland: Reidel, 1981). I have also 
borrowed a line from Anthony Cronin’s The Reductionist Poem. 
I am grateful to Professor Jens Allwood at the University of 
Goteborg for first introducing me to Montague Semantics, to Patricia 
Duncker for her unflagging enthusiasm during my time at the 
University of East Anglia where much of this book was written and to 
the Corporation of Yaddo where final editing was completed. 
Finally, special thanks to Oscar for some very important advice on 
the title. 
250 


PAGE 259:


PAGE 260:
‘Written in glistening prose... a major talent’ 
IRISH INDEPENDENT 
‘An involving, exciting read, filled with well-drawn, credible characters 
and a plot that surges along with a great deal of style... 
provocative... satisfyingly multilayered’ 
SUNDAY BUSINESS POST 
‘Establishes Aifric Campbell as a storyteller of really immense gifts. 
She combines a unique sensibility with a prose of shimmering beauty’ 
JOSEPH O’CONNOR, AUTHOR OF STAR OF THE SEA 
I ay Hamilton lives in a fashionable area of London, listening to. the 
problems of the wealthy clients who frequent his psychoanalysis practice. 
^ But the darker recesses of his own psyche would not stand up to scrutiny: 
his brother Robert, a genius professor of mathematical linguistics at UCLA, 
was apparently killed by rent boys and Jay was the first on the scene. Author 
Dana Flynn is determined to scratch beneath the surface while researching her 
proposed biography of Robert, and finds that Jay’s professionalism is as 
compromised as his private life. 
ISBN 978-1846686580 
9 781846 686580 
A gripping page-turner, The Semantics of Murder i 
of ideas that delivers. 
Fiction £7.99 
cover image: © Getty Images 
cover design: Keenan 
r 
* z 
1 o = 
00 = 
1 o = 
o === 
CO - 

